The Army’s AimPoint Force Structure Initiative https://crsreports.congress.gov May 8, 2020The Army’s AimPoint Force Structure InitiativeBackground The 2018 National Military Strategy describes how the U.S. military is to defend the homeland and retain its competitive advantage to deter competitors and defeat adversaries, whether great power competitors like China and Russia or other security challenges. It is a fundamental departure from other National Military Strategies post-September 11 , which focused on counterinsurgency and defeating violent extremist organizations. In essence, the 2018 National Military Strategy refocuses the Army from fighting counterinsurgencies and violent extremist organizations to countering and possibly confronting Russian and Chinese military forces. The Army’s new AimPoint initiative is intended to be the means to build the force structure needed to implement this new focus. Previous Army Force Structure Construct During the Cold War, the U.S. Army was primarily a division-centric force whereby divisions, consisting of a mix of specialized brigades, battalions, and companies, were the primary warfighting organization. Within the division, the commander controlled a variety of assets such as artillery, engineers, and logistical units that could be assigned to subordinate infantry or armored brigades as the tactical situation required. Divisions were part of corps, which also had their own organic units such as artillery and engineers that the corps commander could allocate to divisions to support operations. In the early 2000s, as the Army became committed to long-term counterinsurgency combat operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, Army units would rotate in and out of these theaters on an annual basis. Based on observations of how these rotations affected soldiers and units, Army leadership determined that the division-centric force was not the best structure to support a rotational force. In September 2003, the U.S. Army began converting from an organization centered on divisions (numbering from 10,000 to 18,000 soldiers) to a force based upon brigade combat teams (BCTs) of around 4,000 soldiers. This new brigade-centric force, known as the modular force, assigned a number of division-level assets to the newly formed BCTs, thereby lessening the operational and tactical roles of the division. Multi-Domain Operations (MDO) According to the Army, current conventional warfighting doctrine is still largely based on the Air-Land Battle concept developed in 1981 to counter Warsaw Pact forces in Europe. As the name indicates, Air-Land Battle is primarily based on operations in the air and land domains. However, competitors now possess increasingly capable anti-access and area denial strategies, meant to separate the Joint Force physically and functionally and alliances politically. Furthermore, near-peer competitors are capable of securing strategic objectives by means other than armed conflict with the United States and its allies. More importantly, the Army can no longer guarantee dominance over a near-peer threat—an advantage that the United States has held for decades. Unlike Air-Land Battle, MDO addresses the notion that competition and conflict occur in multiple domains (land, air, sea, cyber, and space), and that there will be multiple threats across the competition continuum in the future operating environment. As the MDO concept continues to be refined and updated, it will likely drive Army modernization and force structure. The Army aims to achieve a full MDO capability by 2035. Conceptually, the Army, as an element of the Joint Force, plans to conduct MDO (not necessarily in every domain at each moment), primarily by deterrence, in order to prevail in competition. If deterrence fails, and if it becomes necessary, Army forces would penetrate and disable enemy anti-access and area denial (A2/AD) systems and, if successful, exploit any resulting freedom of maneuver to achieve strategic objectives and force a return to competition on favorable terms. Major Aspects of AimPoint Force Structure Initiative The primary means by which the Army intends to build its MDO capability is through what it calls the AimPoint Force Structure Initiative. According to the Army, the AimPoint Force being developed by the Army Futures Command’s (AFC’s) Army Futures and Concepts Center is to be a flexible force structure. While little change is expected at brigade level and below, the Army suggests major changes will occur at higher echelons—division, corps, and theater command—that have primarily played a supporting role in counterinsurgency operations such as in Iraq and Afghanistan. Under MDO, higher field headquarters will now be required to take the lead in coordinating large-scale campaigns against well-armed nation-states such as Russia and China. The Army also notes that the AimPoint Force will be resource-informed, meaning it will be subject to budget constraints and political considerations. Because of the geographic distinctions between the European and Indo-Pacific theaters, individual higher-echelon AimPoint formation force structure will likely differ by theater as opposed to current one-size-fits-all units. Major Proposed Force Structure Initiatives The following sections provide a description of some of AimPoint’s major proposed force structure changes. The Army’s AimPoint Force Structure Initiative https://crsreports.congress.gov Division, Corps, and Theater Level The Army notes that over the past 20 to 30 years, the capacity to conduct campaigns at the division, corps, and theater level was “mortgaged” (i.e., assets and units at these levels were assigned to BCTs). Under AimPoint, headquarters at these levels are being developed and existing ones modified to build back a campaign capability (i.e., adding additional staff, specialists, capabilities, and units) to compete with near-peer adversaries and to employ information warfare and operate in the cyber and space domains. As part of AimPoint, the Army announced on February 11, 2020, the activation of a fourth corps headquarters, designated Fifth Corps (V Corps), which is to be located at Fort Knox, KY. The V Corps Headquarters is to consist of approximately 635 soldiers, of which approximately 200 will support a rotational operational command post in Europe. The V Corps Headquarters is projected to be operational by fall 2020. The Army also plans under AimPoint to develop an unknown number of new Theater Fires Commands intended to coordinate long-range fires of Army missile and extended-range artillery systems and units presently under development. Multi-Domain Task Forces (MDTF) To facilitate the conduct of MDO, under AimPoint, the Army is currently creating three Multi-Domain Task Forces (MDTF). Based on a Field Artillery (FA) brigade and augmented with an intelligence, information operations, cyber, electronic warfare and space (I2CEWS) detachment, the first MDTF was established as a pilot program in 2017 and assigned to U.S. Army Pacific Command, where it participated in a number of exercises and training events. MDTFs focus on penetrating an enemy environment, employing assets that can counter enemy A2/AD capabilities and enemy network-focused targeting of U.S. units. In 2021, the Army plans to establish a second stand-alone MDTF in Europe that is to merge the 41st FA Brigade with an I2CEWS element. In 2022, a third task force, which is yet to be determined, would stand up in the Pacific. The Army envisions MDTFs to comprise about 500 personnel, including personnel from other services. Long-Range Artillery and Missiles Also under the auspices of AFC and AimPoint, the Army is developing long-range precision fires units and systems. Systems under development include a new Precision Strike Missile, or PrSM, which will employ current launchers and is to be capable of achieving greater ranges than current systems. The Army is also developing an Extended Range Cannon Artillery (ERCA) system. The ERCA is said to be an improvement to the current M109A7 Paladin self-propelled howitzer that provides indirect fires for BCTs and at the division-level. The Army is also reportedly in the early stages of developing and testing a Strategic, Long-Range Cannon to augment the ERCA. The Army’s goal for the Strategic, Long-Range Cannon is to be able to successfully engage targets out to 1,000 nautical miles. If successfully developed and fielded, these systems would either be deployed to existing units or new units would be created to accommodate these new weapon systems. Potential Issues for Congress Potential issues for Congress include but not limited to the following: New Requirements for Headquarters and Specialized Units While AimPoint is described as a flexible initiative, the Army has noted that most of the change will occur above BCT level. What are the new requirements for headquarters envisioned by the Army in terms of types and estimated numbers of headquarters? In terms of specialized units, apart from reestablishing V Corps and three currently planned MDTFs, what are some of the other types of specialized units (e.g., artillery, missile, air and missile defense, intelligence) that the Army envisions developing under AimPoint ? Overseas Stationing of Units The Army reportedly has stated that it “needs an enhanced posture forward in both INDOPACOM and in Europe—nothing like the 1980s, but larger than what we have now.” What are both the types and numbers of units by region being developed under AimPoint that the Army plans to be forward-deployed? Will these deployments be rotational or permanent home-station deployments? Estimated Costs The Army’s AimPoint is arguably an ambitious effort intended to be completed by 2035. What are the Army’s estimated costs in terms of personnel, equipment, operations and maintenance, and military construction (MILCON) associated with this effort over this period? Adequacy of Global Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) MDO and AimPoint units such as MDTFs have been characterized as requiring linkage to national C4ISR, space, cyber, and information warfare assets, as well as the other Services and allies. Given this dependency, will the planned Global C4ISR Network be adequate to meet the needs of MDO and new and existing units designated for Europe and INDOPACOM? Applicability to other National Security Challenges As previously noted, MDO and AimPoint units and systems are intended to compete with and, if necessary, confront and defeat great power competitors Russia and China. Some defense experts suggest that in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, the U.S national security construct as it stands could be in question and the Services could face appreciable force structure and budgetary reductions. Given this potential shift in national security focus, how applicable are MDO and the units being developed under the auspices of AimPoint to other national security challenges including potential future pandemic situations? Andrew Feickert, Specialist in Military Ground Forces IF11542The Army’s AimPoint Force Structure Initiative https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF11542 · VERSION 1 · NEW Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. https://crsreports.congress.gov/		2020-05-08T10:04:45-0400
Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Updated April 17, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov R40094 Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service Summary Several U.N. Security Council resolutions adopted between 2006 and 2010 required Iran to cooperate fully with the International Atomic Energy Agency’s (IAEA’s) investigation of its nuclear activities, suspend its uranium enrichment program, suspend its construction of a heavy-water reactor and related projects, and ratify the Additional Protocol to its IAEA safeguards agreement. Iran did not comply with most of the resolutions’ provisions. However, Tehran has implemented various restrictions on, and provided the IAEA with additional information about, its nuclear program pursuant to the July 2015 Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which Tehran concluded with China, France, Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States. On the JCPOA’s Implementation Day, which took place on January 16, 2016, all of the previous resolutions’ requirements were terminated. The nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) and U.N. Security Council Resolution 2231, which the Council adopted on July 20, 2015, compose the current legal framework governing Iran’s nuclear program. Iran and the IAEA agreed in August 2007 on a work plan to clarify outstanding questions regarding Tehran’s nuclear program. The IAEA had essentially resolved most of these issues, but for several years the agency still had questions concerning “possible military dimensions to Iran’s nuclear programme.” A December 2, 2015, report to the IAEA Board of Governors from then-agency Director General Yukiya Amano contains the IAEA’s “final assessment on the resolution” of the outstanding issues. This report provides a brief overview of Iran’s nuclear program and describes the legal basis for the actions taken by the IAEA board and the Security Council. It will be updated as events warrant. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Background ............................................................................................................................... 1 Iran and the IAEA ..................................................................................................................... 6 Potential Noncompliance After September 2005 ................................................................ 8 Iran and the U.N. Security Council ......................................................................................... 12 Authority for IAEA and U.N. Security Council Actions ............................................................... 13 IAEA Statute ........................................................................................................................... 13 U.N. Charter and the Security Council ................................................................................... 14 Has Iran Violated the NPT? ........................................................................................................... 15 Appendixes Appendix A. Iranian Noncompliance with Its IAEA Safeguards Agreement................................ 18 Appendix B. IAEA Special Inspections ........................................................................................ 20 Appendix C. Extended Remarks by William Foster Regarding Possible NPT Article II Violations ................................................................................................................................... 21 Contacts Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 22 Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction Iran ratified the nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) in 1970. Article III of the treaty requires nonnuclear-weapon states-parties1 to accept comprehensive International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards; Tehran concluded a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the IAEA in 1974.2 In 2002, the agency began investigating allegations that Iran had conducted clandestine nuclear activities; the IAEA ultimately reported that some of these activities had violated Tehran’s safeguards agreement. Following more than three years of investigation, the IAEA Board of Governors referred the matter to the U.N. Security Council in February 2006. Since then, the council adopted six resolutions requiring Iran to take steps to alleviate international concerns about its nuclear program. This report provides a brief overview of Iran’s nuclear program and describes the legal basis for the actions taken by the IAEA board and the Security Council. For more detailed information about Iran’s nuclear program, see CRS Report RL34544, Iran’s Nuclear Program: Status, by Paul K. Kerr. For more information about the July 2015 Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) concerning Iran’s nuclear program, see CRS Report R43333, Iran Nuclear Agreement, by Kenneth Katzman and Paul K. Kerr. Background Iran’s nuclear program has generated widespread concern that Tehran is pursuing nuclear weapons. Tehran’s construction of gas centrifuge uranium enrichment facilities has been the main source of proliferation concern. Gas centrifuges enrich uranium by spinning uranium hexafluoride gas at high speeds to increase the concentration of the uranium-235 isotope. Such centrifuges can produce both low-enriched uranium (LEU), which can be used in nuclear power reactors, and highly enriched uranium (HEU), which is one of the two types of fissile material used in nuclear weapons. HEU can also be used as fuel in certain types of nuclear reactors. Iran also has a uranium conversion facility, which converts uranium oxide into several compounds, including uranium hexafluoride. Tehran claims that it wants to produce LEU for its current and future power reactors. Iran’s construction of a reactor moderated by heavy water has also been a source of concern. Although Tehran says that the reactor, which Iran is building at Arak, is intended for the production of medical isotopes, it was a proliferation concern because the reactor’s spent fuel would have contained plutonium well-suited for use in nuclear weapons. In order to be used in nuclear weapons, however, plutonium must be separated from the spent fuel—a procedure called “reprocessing.” Iran has said that it will not engage in reprocessing. Pursuant to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which Iran concluded in July 2015 with China, France, Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States (collectively known as the “P5+1”), Tehran has rendered the Arak reactor’s original core inoperable. Iran has also begun to fulfill a JCPOA requirement to redesign and rebuild the Arak reactor based on a design agreed to by the P5+1 so that it will not produce weapons-grade plutonium. The agreement also requires Iran to export the spent fuel from this reactor and all other nuclear reactors. 1 The NPT defines a nuclear-weapon state as “one which has manufactured and exploded a nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device” prior to January 1, 1967. These states are China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States. 2 INFCIRC/214. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 2 Iran and the IAEA agreed in August 2007 on a work plan to clarify the outstanding questions regarding Tehran’s nuclear program.3 Most of these questions, which had contributed to suspicions that Iran had been pursuing a nuclear weapons program, were subsequently resolved. Then-IAEA Director General Mohamed ElBaradei, however, told the IAEA board June 2, 2008, that there was “one remaining major [unresolved] issue,” which concerns questions regarding “possible military dimensions to Iran’s nuclear programme.”4 The IAEA agency did not make any substantive progress on these matters for some time. Tehran has questioned the authenticity of some of the evidence underlying the agency’s concerns and maintains that it has not done any work on nuclear weapons.5 Iran also expressed concern to the IAEA that resolving some of these issues would require agency inspectors to have “access to sensitive information related to its conventional military and missile related activities.” The IAEA, according to a September 2008 report from ElBaradei, stated its willingness to discuss with Iran modalities that could enable Iran to demonstrate credibly that the activities referred to in the documentation are not nuclear related, as Iran asserts, while protecting sensitive information related to its conventional military activities.6 Indeed, the agency made several specific proposals, but Tehran did not provide the requested information.7 The IAEA Board of Governors adopted a resolution on November 18, 2011, stating that “it is essential” for Iran and the IAEA “to intensify their dialogue aiming at the urgent resolution of all outstanding substantive issues.” IAEA and Iranian officials met 10 times between January 2012 and May 2013 to discuss what the agency termed a “structured approach to the clarification of all outstanding issues related to Iran’s nuclear programme.”8 However, during an October 2013 meeting, IAEA officials and their Iranian counterparts decided to adopt a “new approach” to resolving these issues. Iran signed a joint statement with the IAEA on November 11, 2013, describing a “Framework for Cooperation.” According to the statement, Iran and the IAEA agreed to “strengthen their cooperation and dialogue aimed at ensuring the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme through the resolution of all outstanding issues that have not already been resolved by the IAEA.” Iran subsequently provided the agency with information about several of the outstanding issues. Iran later agreed in May 2014 to provide information to the IAEA by August 25, 2014, about five additional issues, including alleged Iranian research on high explosives and “studies made and/or papers published in Iran in relation to neutron transport 3 The text is available at https://www.iaea.org/sites/default/files/publications/documents/infcircs/2007/infcirc711.pdf. 4 Introductory Statement to the Board of Governors, IAEA Director General Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, June 2, 2008. 5 See, for example, Communication Dated 7 January 2016 Received from the Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the Agency Regarding the Report of the Director General on the Final Assessment on Past and Present Outstanding Issues Regarding Iran’s Nuclear Programme, INFCIRC/893, January 8, 2016. 6 Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and Relevant Provisions of Security Council Resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1835 (2008) in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Report by the Director General, GOV/2008/38, September 15, 2008. 7 See, for example, Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and Relevant Provisions of Security Council Resolutions in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Report by the Director General, GOV/2012/23, May 25, 2012. 8 A September 2012 IAEA Board of Governors resolution reiterated the board’s support for the Agency’s negotiations with Tehran, and stated that “Iranian cooperation with IAEA requests aimed at the resolution of all outstanding issues is essential and urgent in order to restore international confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme.” Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 3 and associated modelling and calculations and their alleged application to compressed materials.” Iran subsequently provided information about four of these issues.9 According to the JCPOA, Iran was to “complete” a series of steps set out in an Iran-IAEA “Roadmap for Clarification of Past and Present Outstanding Issues.” According to then-IAEA Director General Yukiya Amano, this road map set out “a process” under a November 24, 2013, Joint Plan of Action between Iran and the P5+1, “to enable the Agency, with the cooperation of Iran, to make an assessment of issues relating to possible military dimensions to Iran’s nuclear programme.”10 According to a December 2, 2015, report from Amano to the IAEA Board of Governors, “[a]ll the activities contained in the road-map were implemented in accordance with the agreed schedule.”11 The road map required Amano to present this report, which contains the agency’s “final assessment on the resolution” of the aforementioned outstanding issues. In response, the board adopted a resolution on December 15, 2015, that notes Iran’s cooperation with the road map and “further notes that this closes the Board’s consideration” of the “outstanding issues regarding Iran’s nuclear programme.”12 Since the IAEA has verified that Iran has taken the steps required for Implementation Day to take effect, the board is no longer focused on Iran’s compliance with past Security Council resolutions and past issues concerning Iran’s safeguards agreement. Instead, the board is focused on monitoring and verifying Iran’s JCPOA implementation “in light of” United Nations Security Council Resolution 2231, which the Council adopted on July 20, 2015. This latter resolution requests the IAEA Director General “to undertake the necessary verification and monitoring of Iran’s nuclear-related commitments for the full duration of those commitments under the JCPOA.” The December 2015 IAEA resolution requests the Director General to issue quarterly reports to the board regarding Iran’s “implementation of its relevant commitments under the JCPOA for the full duration of those commitments.” The Director General is also to report to the Board of Governors and the Security Council “at any time if the Director General has reasonable grounds to believe there is an issue of concern” regarding Tehran’s compliance with its JCPOA or safeguards obligations. The JCPOA and Resolution 2231 also contain a variety of reporting provisions for the IAEA. For example, the resolution requests the agency’s Director General to provide regular updates to the IAEA Board of Governors and, as appropriate, in parallel to the Security Council on Iran’s implementation of its commitments under the JCPOA and also to report to the IAEA Board of Governors and in parallel to the Security Council at any time if the Director General has reasonable grounds to believe there is an issue of concern directly affecting fulfilment of JCPOA commitments. Several U.N. Security Council Resolutions required Iran to cooperate fully with the IAEA’s investigation of its nuclear activities, suspend its uranium enrichment program, suspend its construction of a heavy-water reactor and related projects, and ratify the Additional Protocol to its IAEA safeguards agreement.13 Tehran has signed, but not ratified, its Additional Protocol. Resolution 1929, which the council adopted in June 2010, contains these requirements and also 9 Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and Relevant Provisions of Security Council Resolutions in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Report by the Director General, GOV/2015/34, May 29, 2015. 10 For more information about the Joint Plan of Action and the JCPOA, see CRS Report R43333, Iran Nuclear Agreement, by Kenneth Katzman and Paul K. Kerr. 11 Final Assessment on Past and Present Outstanding Issues Regarding Iran’s Nuclear Programme, GOV/2015/68, December 2, 2015. 12 Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action Implementation and Verification and Monitoring in the Islamic Republic of Iran in Light of United Nations Security Council Resolution 2231 (2015), GOV/2015/72, December 15, 2015. 13 Iran has a plant for producing heavy water. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 4 required Tehran to refrain from “any activity related to ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons.” Iran has also continued its extensive ballistic missile program. Resolution 1929 also required Iran to comply with the modified Code 3.1 of its subsidiary arrangements. (See “Potential Noncompliance After September 2005.”) Iran did not take any of these steps prior to concluding the JCPOA, but did limit and reverse some aspects of its nuclear program since the government began implementing the November 2013 Joint Plan of Action. Moreover, pursuant to the Joint Plan of Action and its November 2013 agreement with the IAEA, Iran provided some information to the agency required by the modified Code 3.1. Pursuant to the JCPOA, Tehran has since implemented additional restrictions on its uranium enrichment program and heavy-water reactor program, as well as begun implementing its additional protocol and the modified Code 3.1. On the JCPOA’s Implementation Day, which took place on January 16, 2016, all of the previous Security Council resolutions’ requirements were terminated pursuant to U.N. Security Council Resolution 2231, which along with the NPT, composes the current legal framework governing Iran’s nuclear program.14 Although the IAEA reports findings of its inspection and monitoring activities and the JCPOA-established Joint Commission monitors the parties’ implementation of the agreement, compliance determinations are national decisions. Until July 2019, all official reports and statements from the United Nations, European Union, the IAEA, and the non-U.S. participating governments indicated that Iran had fulfilled its JCPOA and related Resolution 2231 requirements.15 16 Beginning in July 2019, the IAEA verified that some of Iran’s nuclear activities were exceeding JCPOA-mandated limits; the government has since increased the number of such activities.17 Specifically, according to agency reports, Iran’s heavy water stockpile, number of installed 14 “Joint Statement by EU High Representative Federica Mogherini and Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif,” January 16, 2016. 15 Iran’s stock of heavy water has exceeded the JCPOA-required limit of 130 metric tons on two occasions since the P5+1 began implementing the agreement. “In both instances, this issue was resolved after Iran shipped out sufficient amounts of material to get back under the limit,” the State Department reported in April 2017 (Adherence to and Compliance with Arms Control, Nonproliferation, and Disarmament Agreements and Commitments, Department of State, April 2017). For more information, see CRS Report R43333, Iran Nuclear Agreement and CRS Report RL34544, Iran’s Nuclear Program: Status, by Paul K. Kerr. 16 According to a May 31, 2019, report from then-IAEA Director General Amano, Iran had conducted research and development using advanced centrifuges; the number of these centrifuges may have exceeded the number permitted by the JCPOA (Verification and Monitoring in the Islamic Republic of Iran in Light of United Nations Security Council Resolution 2231 (2015), Report by the Director General, International Atomic Energy Agency, GOV/2019/21, May 31, 2019; Verification and Monitoring in the Islamic Republic of Iran in Light of United Nations Security Council Resolution 2231 (2015), Report by the Director General, International Atomic Energy Agency, GOV/2019/21, May 31, 2019; GOV/2019/32). In a June 11, 2019, speech to the IAEA Board of Governors, U.S. Ambassador Jackie Wolcott stated that this activity has violated the JCPOA. However, no JCPOA participating government appears to have issued a similar public finding. Moreover, EU High Representative Mogherini stated during a June 17 press conference that “Iran is still compliant” with the JCPOA (Remarks by High Representative/Vice-President Federica Mogherini at the press conference following the Foreign Affairs Council, June 17, 2019). 17 Unless otherwise noted, this paragraph is based on the following sources: GOV/2019/32; Verification and Monitoring in the Islamic Republic of Iran in Light of United Nations Security Council Resolution 2231 (2015), Report by the Director General, GOV/INF/2019/8, July 1, 2019; Verification and Monitoring in the Islamic Republic of Iran in Light of United Nations Security Council Resolution 2231 (2015), Report by the Director General, GOV/INF/2019/9, July 8, 2019; Verification and Monitoring in the Islamic Republic of Iran in Light of United Nations Security Council Resolution 2231 (2015), Report by the Acting Director General, GOV/2019/55, November 11, 2019; Verification and Monitoring in the Islamic Republic of Iran in Light of United Nations Security Council Resolution 2231 (2015), Report by the Acting Director General, GOV/INF/2019/17, November 18, 2019; and Verification and Monitoring in the Islamic Republic of Iran in light of United Nations Security Council Resolution 2231 (2015), Report by the Director General, GOV/2020/5, March 3, 2020. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 5 centrifuges, LEU stockpile, and LEU uranium-235 concentration, exceed JCPOA-mandated limits. Tehran is also conducting JCPOA-prohibited research and development activities, as well as centrifuge manufacturing, and has also begun to enrich uranium at its Fordow enrichment facility.18 In a May 8, 2019, speech, Iranian President Hassan Rouhani cited JCPOA Paragraph 26 as grounds for reducing the government’s performance of some Iranian commitments pursuant to the agreement. According to that paragraph, Iran has stated that it will treat such a re-introduction or re-imposition of the sanctions specified in Annex II, or such an imposition of new nuclear-related sanctions, as grounds to cease performing its commitments under this JCPOA in whole or in part. However, the foreign ministers of France, Germany, and the United Kingdom, collectively known as the “E3,” stated on January 14, 2020, that “Iran is not meeting its [JCPOA] commitments” and announced that the three governments were referring the matter to the agreement’s dispute resolution mechanism.19 The statement explains that the E3 “do not accept the argument that Iran is entitled to reduce compliance” with the JCPOA, and adds that “Iran has never triggered” the agreement’s dispute resolution mechanism “and has no legal grounds to cease implementing the provisions of the agreement.”20 Nevertheless, according to the U.S. government, “under the terms of the JCPOA, Iran may cease performing commitments in whole or in part following the U.S. re-imposition of sanctions.”21 The E3 sent a letter on January 14 to EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Josep Borrell, who will oversee the mechanism’s process.22 A March 2020 report from IAEA Director General Raphael Grossi states that the IAEA has continued verification and monitoring of the restrictions described in Section T of the JCPOA, which prohibits a number of nuclear weapons-related activities.23 The agreement, as noted, describes arrangements for agency inspectors to gain access to Iranian sites, including military sites, other than those that Tehran has declared to the agency, “if the IAEA has concerns regarding undeclared nuclear materials or activities, or activities inconsistent with” the JCPOA. The agreement also provides for alternative means to clarify the matter. The IAEA has not reported whether it has requested JCPOA-related access to any Iranian military facilities, but the agency has a number of methods other than inspections, such as analyzing open-source information and receiving intelligence briefings from governments, to monitor Iranian compliance with these and other JCPOA commitments. According to the April 2018 State Department report [t]he IAEA continues to exercise its full authorities in pursuing any new safeguards-relevant or JCPOA-related information in Iran, including any new concerns regarding weaponization should they arise, through implementation of Iran’s Safeguards Agreement, Additional Protocol, and the enhanced transparency and verification measures contained in the JCPOA.24 18 The JCPOA prohibits Iran from enriching uranium at this facility. 19 “Statement by the Foreign Ministers,” January 14, 2020. 20 “Statement by the Foreign Ministers of France, Germany and the United Kingdom,” January 14, 2020. 21 Email from State Department official, July 17, 2019. A State Department official reiterated this position in a January 31, 2020, interview with a CRS analyst. 22“ Statement by High Representative Borrell as Coordinator of the Joint Commission of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Dispute Resolution Mechanism,” January 14, 2020. 23 GOV/2020/5. 24 Department of State, April 2018. The August 2019 version of the same report notes that the December 15, 2015, IAEA Board of Governors resolution that closed the board’s “consideration” of the “outstanding issues” concerning the Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 6 The August 2019 version of the same report states that “the IAEA continues to monitor and verify Iran’s compliance with its obligations under its [comprehensive safeguards agreement], and the Additional Protocol as well as Iran’s adherence to its JCPOA commitments.”25 Whether there are any disputes between Iran and the IAEA regarding Tehran’s cooperation with the agency’s monitoring and verification of Tehran’s JCPOA compliance is unclear.26 A November report to the IAEA Board of Governors from IAEA Acting Director General Cornel Feruță states that the agency “has conducted complementary accesses under the Additional Protocol to all the sites and locations in Iran which it needed to visit,” but Grossi’s March 2020 report does not repeat this statement.27 Iran and the IAEA As noted, Iran is a party to the NPT and has concluded a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the agency. Such agreements are designed to enable the IAEA to detect the diversion of nuclear material from peaceful purposes to nuclear weapons uses, as well as to detect undeclared nuclear activities and material.28 Safeguards include agency inspections and monitoring of declared nuclear facilities. Although comprehensive safeguards agreements give the IAEA the authority “to verify the absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities, the tools available to it to do so, under such agreements, are limited,” according to the agency.29 As a practical matter, the IAEA’s ability to inspect and monitor nuclear facilities, as well as obtain information, in a particular country pursuant to that government’s comprehensive safeguards agreement is limited to facilities and activities that have been declared by the government.30 Additional Protocols to IAEA comprehensive safeguards agreements increase the agency’s ability to investigate undeclared nuclear facilities and activities by increasing the IAEA’s authority to inspect certain nuclear-related facilities and demand information from possible military dimensions of Iran’s nuclear program, does not preclude the IAEA from investigating any information that is new or inconsistent with its previous assessment of Iran’s past nuclear weapons program, or where it has concerns regarding the potential existence of undeclared nuclear materials or activities. (Adherence to and Compliance with Arms Control, Nonproliferation, and Disarmament Agreements and Commitments, 2019). 25 Adherence to and Compliance with Arms Control, Nonproliferation, and Disarmament Agreements and Commitments, Department of State, August 2019. 26 According to a current and a former State Department official (March 7 and March 9 emails, respectively, to author), Iran may have also violated the JCPOA by, as reported on March 3, 2020, by IAEA Director General Raphael Grossi to the IAEA Board of Governors, failing to satisfy IAEA requests issued on the basis of the agency’s authority pursuant to Tehran’s additional protocol. The JCPOA states that “Iran will provisionally apply the Additional Protocol to its Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement.” The IAEA is investigating possible Iranian noncompliance with the government’s comprehensive safeguards agreement or additional protocol, rather than the JCPOA. (See “Iran and the IAEA.”) 27 GOV/2019/55; GOV/2020/5. 28 2001 IAEA Safeguards Glossary. (Available at http://www-pub.iaea.org/books/IAEABooks/6570/IAEA-Safeguards-Glossary-2001-Edition.) Comprehensive safeguards agreements are based on a model described in INFCIRC 153, available at http://www.iaea.org/Publications/Documents/Infcircs/Others/infcirc153.pdf. According to Amano’s May 2013 report, the IAEA Board of Governors “has confirmed on numerous occasions, since as early as 1992,” that this model agreement “authorizes and requires the Agency to seek to verify both the non-diversion of nuclear material from declared activities (i.e. correctness) and the absence of undeclared nuclear activities in the State (i.e. completeness).” 29 Guidance for States Implementing Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and Additional Protocols, IAEA Services Series 21, May 2016. 30 2001 IAEA Safeguards Glossary. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 7 member states.31 Iran signed such a protocol in December 2003 and agreed to implement the agreement pending ratification. Tehran stopped adhering to its Additional Protocol in 2006.32 The IAEA’s authority to investigate nuclear-weapons-related activity is limited. Then-Director General ElBaradei explained in a 2005 interview that the IAEA does not have “an all-encompassing mandate to look for every computer study on weaponization. Our mandate is to make sure that all nuclear materials in a country are declared to us.”33 Similarly, a February 2006 report from ElBaradei to the IAEA board stated that “absent some nexus to nuclear material the agency’s legal authority to pursue the verification of possible nuclear weapons related activity is limited.”34 There is no requirement that there be any nexus to nuclear material in order for the IAEA to request access to a facility, but there are disagreements among IAEA member states regarding the extent of the agency’s rights to access locations where there is no reason to suspect the presence of nuclear material. Such disagreements could play a role if the IAEA Board is required to consider a request for special inspections in Iran or another country (see Appendix B). Therefore, the closer the connection between nuclear material and the location in question, the more likely the Board would be to approve such an inspection. The current public controversy over Iran’s nuclear program began in August 2002, when the National Council of Resistance on Iran (NCRI), an Iranian exile group, revealed information during a press conference (some of which later proved to be accurate) that Tehran had built nuclear-related facilities that it had not revealed to the IAEA. The United States had been aware of at least some of these activities, according to knowledgeable former officials.35 Prior to the NCRI’s revelations, the IAEA had expressed concerns that Iran had not been providing the agency with all relevant information about its nuclear programs, but had never found Tehran in violation of its safeguards agreement. In fall 2002, the IAEA began to investigate Iran’s nuclear activities at the sites named by the NCRI; inspectors visited the sites the following February. Adopting its first resolution on the matter in September 2003, the IAEA board called on Tehran to increase its cooperation with the agency’s investigation, suspend its uranium enrichment activities, and “unconditionally sign, ratify and fully implement” an Additional Protocol.36 In October 2003, Iran concluded a voluntary agreement with the E3 to suspend its enrichment activities, sign and implement an Additional Protocol to its IAEA safeguards agreement, and comply fully with the IAEA’s investigation.37 As a result, the agency’s board decided to refrain 31 Additional Protocols for an individual IAEA member state are based on the agency’s Model Additional Protocol (INFCIRC/540), available at http://www.iaea.org/Publications/Documents/Infcircs/1997/infcirc540c.pdf. 32 Iran announced that it would stop implementing the protocol two days after the IAEA Board of governors adopted a resolution in February 2006 that referred Iran’s noncompliance with its IAEA safeguards agreement to the U.N. Security Council. Iran has been implementing the protocol pursuant to the JCPOA. 33 “Tackling the Nuclear Dilemma: An Interview with IAEA Director-General Mohamed ElBaradei,” February 4, 2005, available at http://www.armscontrol.org/act/2005_03/ElBaradei. 34 Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Report by the Director General, GOV/2006/15, February 27, 2006. 35 Gary Samore, former Senior Director for Nonproliferation and Export Controls on the National Security Council, personal communication June 5, 2008; then-Director of Central Intelligence George J. Tenet, “DCI Remarks on Iraq’s WMD Programs,” February 5, 2004, available at https://www.cia.gov/news-information/speeches-testimony/2004/tenet_georgetownspeech_02052004.html. 36 Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Report by the Director General, GOV/2003/75, November 10, 2003. 37 The text of the agreement is available at https://fas.org/nuke/guide/iran/uk2005.pdf. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 8 from referring the matter to the U.N. Security Council. As noted, Tehran signed this Additional Protocol in December 2003, but has never ratified it.38 Ultimately, the IAEA’s investigation, as well as information Iran provided after the October 2003 agreement, revealed that Iran had engaged in a variety of clandestine nuclear-related activities, some of which violated the country’s safeguards agreement (see Appendix A). After October 2003, Iran continued some of its enrichment-related activities, but Tehran and the E3 agreed in November 2004 to a more detailed suspension agreement.39 However, Iran resumed uranium conversion in August 2005 under the leadership of then-President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who had been elected two months earlier. On September 24, 2005, the IAEA Board of Governors adopted a resolution (GOV/2005/77)40 that, for the first time, found Iran to be in noncompliance with its IAEA safeguards agreement. The board, however, did not refer Iran to the Security Council, choosing instead to give Tehran additional time to comply with the board’s demands. The resolution urged Iran  to implement transparency measures including access to individuals, documentation relating to procurement, dual use equipment, certain military owned workshops, and research and development locations;  to reestablish full and sustained suspension of all enrichment-related activity;  to reconsider the construction of the research reactor moderated by heavy water;  to ratify promptly and implement in full the Additional Protocol; and  to continue to act in accordance with the provisions of the Additional Protocol. No international legal obligations required Tehran to take these steps. But ElBaradei’s September 2008 report asserted that, without Iranian implementation of such “transparency measures,” the IAEA would “not be in a position to progress in its verification of the absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities in Iran.” Iran announced in January 2006 that it would resume research and development on its centrifuges at Natanz. The next month, the IAEA Board of Governors referred Iran’s case to the U.N. Security Council.41 Tehran announced shortly after that it would stop implementing its Additional Protocol. (For details, see “Iran and the U.N. Security Council” below.) Potential Noncompliance After September 2005 Iran further scaled back its cooperation with the IAEA in March 2007, when the government told the agency that it would stop complying with a portion of the subsidiary arrangements for its IAEA safeguards agreement.42 That provision (called the modified code 3.1), to which Iran agreed in February 2003, requires Tehran to provide design information for new nuclear facilities “as soon as the decision to construct, or to authorize construction, of such a facility has been taken, whichever is earlier.” Beginning in March 2007, Iran argued that it was only obligated to adhere to the previous notification provisions of its subsidiary arrangements, which required Tehran to 38 Iran has been implementing the protocol pursuant to the JCPOA. 39 The text of the agreement is available at https://fas.org/nuke/guide/iran/uk2005.pdf. 40 Available at http://www.iaea.org/Publications/Documents/Board/2005/gov2005-77.pdf. 41 For details on the IAEA’s authority to refer noncompliance cases to the Security Council, see “Iran and the U.N. Security Council.” 42 According to the 2001 IAEA Safeguards Glossary, subsidiary arrangements describe the “technical and administrative procedures for specifying how the provisions laid down in a safeguards agreement are to be applied.” Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 9 provide design information for a new facility 180 days before introducing nuclear material into it.43 This decision constituted the basis for Iran’s stated rationale for its subsequent refusal to provide the IAEA with some information concerning its nuclear program. For example, Tehran had refused to provide updated design information for the heavy-water reactor under construction at Arak.44 As part of the November 2013 Joint Plan of Action, Iran submitted this information to the IAEA on February 12, 2014.45 Similarly, Tehran had refused to provide the IAEA with design information for a reactor that Iran intends to construct at Darkhovin. Although Iran provided the agency with preliminary design information about the Darkhovin reactor in a September 22, 2009, letter, the IAEA requested Tehran to “provide additional clarifications” of the information, according to a November 2009 report.46 Amano reported in September 2010 that Iran had “provided only limited design information with respect to” the reactor.47 IAEA reports since 2012 do not appear to address this issue. Tehran also argued, based on its March 2007 decision, that its failure to notify the IAEA before September 2009 that it has been constructing a gas-centrifuge uranium enrichment facility, called the Fordow facility, near the city of Qom was consistent with the government’s safeguards obligations. Exactly when Iran decided to construct the facility is unclear. Amano reported in May 2012 that the IAEA has requested information from Iran regarding the Fordow construction decision. But Tehran, according to Amano’s November 2015 report, has not yet provided all of this information. Subsequent reports from Amano have not addressed the issue. Both the 2007 decision, which the IAEA asked Iran to “reconsider,” and Tehran’s refusal to provide the design information appear to be inconsistent with the government’s safeguards obligations. Although Article 39 of Iran’s safeguards agreement states that the subsidiary arrangements “may be extended or changed by agreement between” Iran and the IAEA, the agreement does not provide for a unilateral modification or suspension of any portion of those 43 During a November 2011 session of the Non-Aligned Movement, Ambassador Ali Asghar Soltanieh, then Iran’s Permanent Representative to the IAEA, characterized the modified Code 3.1 as “merely a suggestion” by the IAEA Board of Governors. See “Iran Provides 20 Answers to Clarify Ambiguities about Its Nuclear Program,” Tehran Times, November 9, 2011. 44 This lack of information was “having an increasingly adverse impact on the Agency’s ability to effectively verify the design of the facility and to implement an effective safeguards approach,” according to a May 22, 2013, report from Amano (Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and Relevant Provisions of Security Council Resolutions in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Report by the Director General, GOV/2013/27, May 22, 2013). A November 2013 report from Amano explains that the IAEA “needs updated design information as early as possible in order ... to ensure that all possible diversion paths are identified, and appropriate safeguards measures and customized safeguards equipment are put in place.” (Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and Relevant Provisions of Security Council Resolutions in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Report by the Director General, GOV/2013/56, November 14, 2013.) Iran has concluded “a safeguards approach for the reactor” (Status of Iran’s Nuclear Programme in Relation to the Joint Plan of Action, Report by the Director General, GOV/INF/2015/8, April 20, 2015). 45 Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and Relevant Provisions of Security Council Resolutions in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Report by the Director General, GOV/2014/10, February 20, 2014. 46 Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and Relevant Provisions of Security Council Resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1835 (2008) in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Report by the Director General, GOV/2008/59, November 19, 2008. 47 Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement in Relevant Provisions of Security Council Resolutions in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Report by the Director General, GOV/2010/46, September 6, 2010. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 10 arrangements.48 Moreover, the IAEA legal adviser explained in a March 2009 statement49 that Tehran’s failure to provide design information for the reactors is “inconsistent with” Iran’s obligations under its subsidiary arrangements. The adviser, however, added that “it is difficult to conclude that” Tehran’s refusal to provide the information “in itself constitutes noncompliance with, or a breach of” Iran’s safeguards agreement. Nevertheless, a November 2009 report from ElBaradei described Tehran’s failures both to notify the agency of the decision to begin constructing the Fordow facility, as well as to provide the relevant design information in a timely fashion, as “inconsistent with” Iran’s safeguards obligations. The report similarly described Iran’s delay in providing design information for the Darkhovin reactor. Iran may also have violated its safeguards agreement if it decided to construct other new nuclear facilities without informing the IAEA. The agency has investigated whether Iran has made such decisions. For example, the IAEA has asked the government for information about Iranian statements that the government is planning to construct new uranium enrichment facilities, is designing a nuclear reactor similar to a research reactor located in Tehran, is producing fuel for four new research reactors, and is planning to construct additional nuclear power reactors. Pursuant to its November 2013 agreement with the IAEA, Iran has provided at least some of this information to the agency. Iran’s March 2007 decision regarding the provision of information to the IAEA also formed the basis for Tehran’s refusal until August 2009 to allow agency inspectors to verify design information for the Arak reactor. This action also appeared to be inconsistent with Tehran’s safeguards agreement. Article 48 of that agreement states that the IAEA “may send inspectors to facilities to verify the design information provided to the Agency”; in fact, the agency has a “continuing right” to do so, according to a November 2008 report from ElBaradei.50 Moreover, the legal adviser’s statement characterized Iran’s refusal to allow IAEA inspectors to verify the Arak reactor’s design information as “inconsistent with” Tehran’s obligations under its safeguards agreement.51 IAEA inspectors visited the reactor facility in August 2009 to verify design information, according to a report ElBaradei issued the same month.52 Inspectors have visited the facility several more times, according to reports from Amano. In addition to the lapses described above, Iran’s failure to notify the IAEA of its decision to produce enriched uranium containing a maximum of 20% uranium-235 in time for agency inspectors to adjust their safeguards procedures may, according to a February 2010 report from Amano, have violated Iran’s IAEA safeguards agreement.53 Article 45 of that agreement requires that Tehran notify the IAEA “with design information in respect of a modification relevant for safeguards purposes sufficiently in advance for the safeguards procedures to be adjusted when 48 See also GOV/2007/22, available at http://www.iaea.org/Publications/Documents/Board/2007/gov2007-22.pdf. Security Council Resolution 1929 affirmed that Code 3.1 “cannot be modified nor suspended unilaterally.” 49 “Statement by the Legal Adviser,” Meeting of the Board of Governors, March 2009. 50 GOV/2008/59. Security Council Resolution 1929 affirmed this statement. 51 Iran stated in an April 2007 letter to the IAEA that, given Tehran’s March 2007 decision regarding the subsidiary arrangements to its safeguards agreement, such visits were unjustified. 52 Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and Relevant Provisions of Security Council Resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1835 (2008) in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Report by the Director General, GOV/2009/55, August 28, 2009. 53 Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and Relevant Provisions of Security Council Resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1835 (2008) in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Report by the Director General, GOV/2010/10, February 18, 2010. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 11 necessary,” according to Amano’s report, which describes Iran’s enrichment decision as “clearly relevant for safeguards purposes.” The IAEA board has neither formally found that any of the Iranian actions described above are in noncompliance with Tehran’s safeguards agreement, nor referred these issues to the U.N. Security Council. The IAEA board adopted a resolution on November 27, 2009, that described Iran’s failure to notify the agency of the Fordow facility as “inconsistent with” the subsidiary arrangements under Iran’s safeguards agreement, but this statement did not constitute a formal finding of noncompliance. A September 13, 2012, IAEA board resolution expressed “serious concern” that Tehran has not complied with the obligations described in IAEA Board of Governors and U.N. Security Council resolutions, but the September resolution did not contain a formal finding of noncompliance.54 More recently, a March 3, 2020, report from IAEA Director General Grossi to the agency’s Board of Governors stated that the IAEA has “identified a number of questions related to possible undeclared nuclear material and nuclear-related activities” that had taken place at three undeclared Iranian locations.55 Pursuant to Iran’s comprehensive safeguards agreement and additional protocol, the agency has requested information about these activities, as well as access to two suspected sites.56 Tehran has provided neither the information nor the access.57 In a March 4 press interview, Grossi explained that “[t]he fact that we found traces (of uranium) is very important. That means there is the possibility of nuclear activities and material that are not under international supervision and about which we know not the origin or the intent.”58 Grossi’s March 3 report explained that Iran’s lack of cooperation is “adversely affecting the Agency’s ability to clarify and resolve the questions and thereby to provide credible assurance of the absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities in Iran.”59 Iran wrote in a January 2020 letter that the government “will not recognize any allegation on past activities and does not consider itself obliged to respond to such allegations.”60 Tehran explained in a March 4 letter to the IAEA that the agency’s requests for access are based on “Intelligence Services’ fabricated information” and are, therefore, illegitimate.61 The letter adds that Iran reaffirms its determination to continue to engage and cooperate with the Agency strictly in line with its commitments…. Iran has announced to the Agency that it is ready 54 Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and Relevant Provisions of United Nations Security Council Resolutions in the Islamic Republic of Iran, GOV/2012/50, September 13, 2012. 55 NPT Safeguards Agreement with the Islamic Republic of Iran, Report by the Director General, GOV/2020/15, March 3, 2020. Grossi also reported that the IAEA “has detected natural uranium particles of anthropogenic origin at a location in Iran not declared to the Agency.” Feruță reported the uranium detection in his November 2019 report (GOV/2020/5; GOV/2019/55). U.S. Ambassador Wolcott told the IAEA Board of Governors on March 11 that this issue is “in addition to” the unresolved safeguards matters described above. 56 Ibid. 57 “Iran informed the Agency verbally that it was unable to provide access to either location,” according to Grossi’s March 3 report (GOV/2020/15). 58 Didier Lauras and Jastinder Khera, “IAEA Chief Demands 'Clarifications' on Iran's Nuclear Program,” Agence France Presse, March 4, 2020. 59 GOV/2020/15. 60 Ibid. 61 Explanatory Note On the Report of the IAEA Director General entitled “NPT Safeguards Agreement with the Islamic Republic of Iran (GOV/2020/15),” INFCIRC/933, March 5, 2020. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 12 to enter into a political dialogue with the Agency to enhance the common understanding in this regard.62 Referring to the reports from Grossi, U.S. Ambassador Jackie Wolcott told the IAEA Board of Governors on March 11 that “Iran’s failure to declare nuclear material or activities in Iran, and refusal to comply with IAEA requests for information or access, could also represent violations of Iran’s safeguards obligations, and indeed of Article III of the NPT.”63 Iran and the U.N. Security Council As noted, Iran announced in January 2006 that it would resume research and development on its centrifuges at Natanz. In response, the IAEA board adopted a resolution (GOV/2006/14)64 on February 4, 2006, referring the matter to the Security Council and reiterating its call for Iran to take the measures specified in the September resolution. Two days later, Tehran announced that it would stop implementing its Additional Protocol. On March 29, 2006, the U.N. Security Council President issued a statement, which was not legally binding, that called on Iran to “take the steps required” by the February IAEA board resolution. The council subsequently adopted six resolutions concerning Iran’s nuclear program: 1696 (July 2006), 1737 (December 2006), 1747 (March 2007), 1803 (March 2008), 1835 (September 2008), and 1929 (June 2010). The second, third, fourth, and sixth resolutions imposed a variety of restrictions on Iran. Resolution 1696 was the first to place legally binding Security Council requirements on Iran with respect to its nuclear program. That resolution made mandatory the IAEA-demanded suspension and called on Tehran to implement the transparency measures called for by the IAEA board’s February 2006 resolution. Resolution 1737 reiterated these requirements but expanded the suspension’s scope to include “work on all heavy water-related projects.” It is worth noting that the Security Council has acknowledged (in Resolution 1803, for example) Iran’s rights under Article IV of the NPT, which states that parties to the treaty have “the inalienable right ... to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful Purposes.” As noted, Resolution 1929 also required Tehran to refrain from “any activity related to ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons” and to comply with the modified Code 3.1 of its subsidiary arrangement. Resolution 2231, which the U.N. Security Council adopted on July 20, 2015, states that all of the previous resolutions’ requirements would be terminated when the council receives a report from the IAEA stating that Iran has implemented the nuclear-related measures by Implementation Day, as described by the July 2015 Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. As noted, Implementation Day took place on January 16, 2016. Resolution 2231 also “reaffirms that Iran shall cooperate fully as the IAEA requests to be able to resolve all outstanding issues, as identified in IAEA reports.” The IAEA Board of Governors’ December 2015 resolution noted that the board had closed its consideration of the “outstanding issues regarding Iran’s nuclear programme.” The JCPOA spells out a process for Iran or the P5+1 to resolve disputes over alleged breaches of their JCPOA commitments pursuant to the agreement. Both the JCPOA and Resolution 2231 contain a “snap back” mechanism to reimpose sanctions should Iran fail to resolve satisfactorily a P5+1 claim regarding Iranian JCPOA noncompliance. This mechanism provides that any 62 Ibid. 63 “U.S. Statement as Delivered by Ambassador Jackie Wolcott,” IAEA Board of Governors Meeting: Agenda Item 5: Verification and Monitoring in Iran, March 11, 2020. 64 Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement in the Islamic Republic of Iran, GOV/2006/14, February 4, 2006. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 13 permanent UN Security Council member would be able to veto a Security Council resolution that would preserve U.N. sanctions relief in the event of Iranian noncompliance. The JCPOA specifies that, in such a case, “the provisions of the old U.N. Security Council resolutions would be re-imposed, unless the U.N. Security Council decides otherwise.” The other P5+1 states are able to invoke this mechanism, but whether the United States may do so is unclear because Resolution 2231 provides that only a “JCPOA participant state” may bring a noncompliance finding to the Security Council; U.S. officials have stated that the United States is no longer participating in the agreement. Authority for IAEA and U.N. Security Council Actions The legal authority for the actions taken by the IAEA Board of Governors and the U.N. Security Council is found in both the IAEA Statute and the U.N. Charter. The following sections discuss the relevant portions of those documents. IAEA Statute65 Two sections of the IAEA Statute explain what the agency should do if an IAEA member state is found to be in noncompliance with its safeguards agreement.66 Article III B. 4. of the statute states that the IAEA is to submit annual reports to the U.N. General Assembly and, “when appropriate,” to the U.N. Security Council. If “there should arise questions that are within the competence of the Security Council,” the article adds, the IAEA “shall notify the Security Council, as the organ bearing the main responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.” Additionally, Article XII C. states that IAEA inspectors are to report noncompliance issues to the agency’s Director General, who is to report the matter to the IAEA Board of Governors. The board is then to “call upon the recipient State or States to remedy forthwith any non-compliance which it finds to have occurred,” as well as “report the non-compliance to all members and to the Security Council and General Assembly of the United Nations.” In the case of Iran, the September 24, 2005, IAEA board resolution (GOV/2005/77) stated that the board found that Iran’s many failures and breaches of its obligations to comply with its NPT Safeguards Agreement, as detailed in GOV/2003/75 [a November 2003 report from then-Director General ElBaradei], constitute non compliance in the context of Article XII.C of the Agency’s Statute; According to the resolution, the board also found that the history of concealment of Iran’s nuclear activities referred to in the Director General’s report [GOV/2003/75], the nature of these activities, issues brought to light in the course of the Agency’s verification of declarations made by Iran since September 2002 and the resulting absence of confidence that Iran’s nuclear programme is exclusively for peaceful purposes have given rise to questions that are within the competence of the 65 The IAEA Statute is not self-executing; the Agency implements safeguards agreements reached with individual governments and certain regional organizations. As noted, comprehensive safeguards agreements are based on a model described in INFCIRC 153. 66 The text of the IAEA Statute is available at https://www.iaea.org/about/statute. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 14 Security Council, as the organ bearing the main responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. ElBaradei issued the report cited by the resolution, GOV/2003/75, in November 2003.67 It described a variety of Iranian nuclear activities, which are detailed in Appendix A, that violated Tehran’s safeguards agreement. ElBaradei subsequently reported that Iran has taken corrective measures to address these safeguards breaches. As noted above, the 2005 resolution called on Iran to take a variety of actions that Tehran was not legally required to implement. U.N. Charter and the Security Council Several articles of the U.N. Charter, which is a treaty, describe the Security Council’s authority to impose requirements and sanctions on Iran.68 Article 24 confers on the council “primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.” The article also states that the “specific powers granted to the Security Council for the discharge of these duties are laid down” in several chapters of the charter, including Chapter VII, which describes the actions that the council may take in response to “threats to the peace, breaches of the peace, and acts of aggression.” Chapter VII of the charter contains three articles relevant to the Iran case. Security Council resolutions that made mandatory the IAEA’s demands concerning Iran’s nuclear program invoked Chapter VII. Article 39 of that chapter states that the council shall determine the existence of any threat to the peace, breach of the peace, or act of aggression and shall make recommendations, or decide what measures shall be taken in accordance with Articles 41 and 42, to maintain or restore international peace and security. Resolution 1696 invoked Article 40 of Chapter VII “in order to make mandatory the suspension required by the IAEA.” As noted, that resolution did not impose any sanctions on Iran. Article 40 states that the Security Council may, before making the recommendations or deciding upon the measures provided for in Article 39 [of Chapter VII], call upon the parties concerned to comply with such provisional measures as it deems necessary or desirable. Resolutions 1737, 1747, 1803, and 1929, which did impose sanctions, invoked Article 41 of Chapter VII. According to Article 41, the Security Council may decide what measures not involving the use of armed force are to be employed to give effect to its decisions, and it may call upon the Members of the United Nations to apply such measures. These may include complete or partial interruption of economic relations and of rail, sea, air, postal, telegraphic, radio, and other means of communication, and the severance of diplomatic relations. As noted, Security Council resolution 1835 did not impose new sanctions, but reaffirmed the previous resolutions and called on Iran to comply with them. It is worth noting that Article 25 of the U.N. Charter obligates U.N. members “to accept and carry out the decisions of the Security Council.” Moreover, Article 103 of the Charter states that 67 Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Report by the Director General, GOV/2003/75, November 10, 2003. 68 The text of the charter is available at http://www.un.org/en/sections/un-charter/un-charter-full-text/. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 15 [i]n the event of a conflict between the obligations of the Members of the United Nations under the present Charter and their obligations under any other international agreement, their obligations under the present Charter shall prevail. The IAEA also has an obligation to cooperate with the Security Council, “[b]y virtue of its Relationship Agreement with the United Nations.”69 As noted, Security Council Resolution 2231 requests the IAEA Director General “to undertake the necessary verification and monitoring of Iran’s nuclear-related commitments for the full duration of those commitments under the JCPOA.” Has Iran Violated the NPT?70 Whether Iran has violated the NPT is unclear. The treaty does not contain a mechanism for determining that a state-party has violated its obligations. Moreover, there does not appear to be a formal procedure for determining such violations. An NPT Review Conference would, however, be one venue for NPT states-parties to make such a determination. The U.N. Security Council has never declared Iran to be in violation of the NPT; neither the council nor the U.N. General Assembly has a responsibility to adjudicate treaty violations. However, the lack of a ruling by the council on Iran’s compliance with the NPT has apparently had little practical effect because, as noted, the council has taken action in response to the IAEA Board of Governors’ determination that Iran has violated its safeguards agreement. Iran’s violations of its safeguards agreement appear to constitute violations of Article III, which requires NPT nonnuclear-weapon states-parties to accept IAEA safeguards, in accordance with the agency’s statue, “for the exclusive purpose of verification of the fulfillment of its obligations assumed under this Treaty with a view to preventing diversion of nuclear energy from peaceful uses to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices.” Tehran may also have violated provisions of Article II which state that nonnuclear-weapon states-parties shall not “manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices” or “seek or receive any assistance in the manufacture of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices.” As noted, the IAEA investigated evidence of what then-IAEA Director General Mohamed ElBaradei described in June 2008 as “possible military dimensions to Iran’s nuclear programme.” Such activities may indicate that Tehran has violated both Article II provisions described above. Moreover, a November 2007 National Intelligence Estimate (NIE) stated that “until fall 2003, Iranian military entities were working under government direction to develop nuclear weapons.”71 This past program could be a violation of Article II, although the estimate does not provide any detail about the program. Nevertheless, the IAEA has never reported that Iran has attempted to develop nuclear weapons. Despite the lack of such an IAEA conclusion, a 2005 State Department report regarding states’ compliance with nonproliferation agreements argued that the country had violated Article II of the NPT: 69 GOV/2013/27. The agreement is contained in INFCIRC/11. 70 Portions of this section are based on interviews with U.N. and State Department officials. 71 Iran: Nuclear Intentions and Capabilities, National Intelligence Estimate, November 2007. Subsequent U.S. official statements have been consistent with the NIE. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 16 The breadth of Iran’s nuclear development efforts, the secrecy and deceptions with which they have been conducted for nearly 20 years, its redundant and surreptitious procurement channels, Iran’s persistent failure to comply with its obligations to report to the IAEA and to apply safeguards to such activities, and the lack of a reasonable economic justification for this program leads us to conclude that Iran is pursuing an effort to manufacture nuclear weapons, and has sought and received assistance in this effort in violation of Article II of the NPT.72 The report also stated that Iran’s “weapons program combines elements” of Tehran’s declared nuclear activities, as well as suspected “undeclared fuel cycle and other activities that may exist, including those that may be run solely by the military.” The State Department’s 2005 reasoning appears to be based on an interpretation of the NPT which holds that a wide scope of nuclear activities could constitute violations of Article II. The 2005 report states that assessments regarding Article II compliance “must look at the totality of the facts, including judgments as to” a state-party’s “purpose in undertaking the nuclear activities in question.” The report also includes a list of activities which could constitute such noncompliance.73 The 2005 State Department report cites testimony from then-Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Director William Foster during a 1968 Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearing.74 Foster stated that “facts indicating that the purpose of a particular activity was the acquisition of a nuclear explosive device would tend to show non-compliance” with Article II. He gave two examples: “the construction of an experimental or prototype nuclear explosive device” and “the production of components which could only have relevance” to such a device. However, Foster also noted that a variety of other activities could also violate Article II, adding that the United States believed it impossible “to formulate a comprehensive definition or interpretation.” It is worth noting that the 2005 State Department report’s arguments appear to rely heavily on the notion that a state’s apparent intentions underlying certain nuclear-related activities can be used to determine violations of Article II. This interpretation is not shared by all experts.75 The 2005 report “primarily reflected activities from January 2002 through December 2003.” Whether the State Department assesses that Iran has violated Article II since then is unclear. A version of the report released in 2010, which primarily reflected activities from January 1, 2004, through December 31, 2008, states that “the issues underlying” the 2005 report’s conclusion regarding Iran’s Article II compliance “remain unresolved.”76 Subsequent versions of the report reiterated the 2010 report’s assessment until 2016, when the State Department assessed that “previous 72 Adherence to and Compliance with Arms Control, Nonproliferation and Disarmament Agreements and Commitments, Department of State, August 2005. 73 According to the report, such activities can include (1) the presence of undeclared nuclear facilities; (2) procurement patterns inconsistent with a civil nuclear program (e.g., clandestine procurement networks, possibly including the use of front companies, false end-use information, and fraudulent documentation); (3) security measures beyond what would be appropriate for peaceful, civil nuclear installations; (4) a pattern of Article III safeguards violations suggestive not of mere mistake or incompetence, but of willful violation and/or systematic deception and denial efforts aimed at concealing nuclear activities from the IAEA; and (5) a nuclear program with little (or no) coherence for peaceful purposes, but great coherence for weapons purposes. 74 Nonproliferation Treaty, Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, Joint Committee on Atomic Energy [Part 1] July 10-12, 17, 1968; Session 90-2 (1968). The complete statement regarding Article II violations is in Appendix C. 75 Personal communication with Andreas Persbo, Senior Researcher, the Verification Research, Training and Information Centre. 76 Quotations are from Adherence to and Compliance with Arms Control, Nonproliferation, and Disarmament Agreements and Commitments, Department of State, July 2010. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 17 issues leading to NPT noncompliance findings [regarding Iran] had been resolved.”77 As noted, the 2007 NIE assessed that Iran halted its nuclear weapons program in 2003; subsequent U.S. official statements have consistently reiterated that Tehran has not yet decided to build nuclear weapons.78 The United Kingdom’s then-Foreign Secretary William Hague would not say whether Iran had violated Article II when asked by a Member of Parliament in March 2012.79 77 Adherence to and Compliance with Arms Control, Nonproliferation, and Disarmament Agreements and Commitments, Department of State, April 2016. 78 See, for example, Director of National Intelligence James R. Clapper, Statement for the Record, U.S. Intelligence Community Worldwide Threat Assessment, February 26, 2015. The State Department compliance report covering 2018 states that the U.S. intelligence community “continued to assess that Iran is not currently engaged in key activities associated with the design and development of a nuclear weapon.” (Adherence to and Compliance with Arms Control, Nonproliferation, and Disarmament Agreements and Commitments, Department of State, August 2019.) An April 2020 executive summary of the same report neither reiterates nor refutes this statement. 79 Developments in UK Foreign Policy, House of Commons: Oral Evidence Taken Before the Foreign Affairs Committee, March 8, 2012. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 18 Appendix A. Iranian Noncompliance with Its IAEA Safeguards Agreement The November 2003 report (GOV/2003/75) from then-IAEA Director General ElBaradei to the agency’s Board of Governors details what the September 2005 board resolution described as “Iran’s many failures and breaches of its obligations to comply with its safeguards agreement.” The report stated that Iran has failed in a number of instances over an extended period of time to meet its obligations under its Safeguards Agreement with respect to the reporting of nuclear material and its processing and use, as well as the declaration of facilities where such material has been processed and stored. The report detailed some of these failures and referenced other failures described in two earlier reports (GOV/2003/40 and GOV/2003/63) from ElBaradei to the IAEA board.80 According to GOV/2003/40, Iran failed to declare the following activities to the agency:  The importation of natural uranium, and its subsequent transfer for further processing.  The processing and use of the imported natural uranium, including the production and loss of nuclear material, and the production and transfer of resulting waste. Additionally, Iran failed to  declare the facilities where nuclear material (including the waste) was received, stored, and processed;  provide in a timely manner updated design information for a research reactor located in Tehran; as well as  provide in a timely manner information on two waste storage sites. GOV/2003/63 stated that Iran failed to report uranium conversion experiments to the IAEA. According to GOV/2003/75, Iran failed to report the following activities to the IAEA:  The use of imported natural uranium hexafluoride for the testing of centrifuges, as well as the subsequent production of enriched and depleted uranium.  The importation of natural uranium metal and its subsequent transfer for use in laser enrichment experiments, including the production of enriched uranium, the loss of nuclear material during these operations, and the production and transfer of resulting waste.  The production of a variety of nuclear compounds from several different imported nuclear materials, and the production and transfer of resulting wastes.  The production of uranium targets and their irradiation in the Tehran Research Reactor, the subsequent processing of those targets (including the separation of plutonium), the production and transfer of resulting waste, and the storage of unprocessed irradiated targets. 80 Those reports are available at http://www.iaea.org/Publications/Documents/Board/2003/gov2003-40.pdf and http://www.iaea.org/Publications/Documents/Board/2003/gov2003-63.pdf. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 19 Iran also failed to provide the agency with design information for a variety of nuclear-related facilities, according to the report. These included the following:  A centrifuge testing facility.  Two laser laboratories and locations where resulting wastes were processed.  Facilities involved in the production of a variety of nuclear compounds.  The Tehran Research Reactor (with respect to the irradiation of uranium targets), the hot cell facility where the plutonium separation took place, as well as the relevant waste handling facility. In addition, the report cited Iran’s “failure on many occasions to co-operate to facilitate the implementation of safeguards, through concealment” of its nuclear activities. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 20 Appendix B. IAEA Special Inspections As noted, Iran’s obligations under its Additional Protocol to provide access to certain locations are unclear; Tehran may refuse to grant the IAEA access to certain facilities. In such a case, the IAEA Director General could call for a special inspection; the inspection could require approval from the IAEA Board of Governors. According to the IAEA, an inspection is deemed to be special when it is in addition to IAEA routine inspections or “involves access to information or locations” that have not been identified to the IAEA as part of the agency’s implementation of safeguards in that country.81 Such inspections “are foreseen in all Agency safeguards agreements, principally as a means for the Agency to resolve unforeseen verification problems,” according to a 1991 IAEA document.82 Paragraph 73 of the model safeguards agreement, INFCIRC 153, states that comprehensive safeguards agreements should provide for the IAEA’s ability to “make special inspections,” subject to certain procedures, if the agency considers that information made available by the State, including explanations from the State and information obtained from routine inspections, is not adequate for the Agency to fulfill its responsibilities under the Agreement. According to the 1991 document, a special inspection could be triggered by the IAEA’s receipt of “plausible information, which is not adequately explained by the State or otherwise resolved” by other IAEA inspections that the country has “nuclear material in a nuclear activity” outside of IAEA safeguards, or that the state has an undeclared nuclear facility that it had been required to report to the agency. The IAEA Director General “has the authority ... to determine the need for, and to direct the carrying out of, special inspections,” according to another 1991 IAEA paper.83 In the event that the IAEA argues for a special inspection in a country, the agency and the government “must hold immediate consultations,” according to the 1991 paper. Any dispute regarding the inspection request must be resolved according to dispute settlement provisions described in INFCIRC 153. However, paragraph 18 of INFCIRC 153 states that if the Board, upon report of the Director General, decides that an action by the State is essential and urgent in order to ensure verification that nuclear material subject to safeguards under the Agreement is not diverted to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices the Board shall be able to call upon the State to take the required action without delay, irrespective of whether procedures for the settlement of a dispute have been invoked. If the state refuses the inspection, the IAEA Board of Governors can take action according to paragraph 19 of INFCIRC 153, including reporting the matter to the U.N. Security Council.84 81 2001 IAEA Safeguards Glossary. According to that Glossary, special inspections can also be used “to verify the information contained in special reports.” States with comprehensive safeguards agreements are required to submit a special report to the IAEA if there is a “loss of nuclear material exceeding specified limits” or if “containment and surveillance measures have been unexpectedly changed from those specified in the Subsidiary Arrangements.” Subsidiary arrangements describe the “technical and administrative procedures for specifying how the provisions laid down in a safeguards agreement are to be applied.” The IAEA negotiates changes to such arrangements with the state if alterations to the country’s nuclear facilities necessitate such changes. 82 GOV/INF/613, May 29, 1991. 83 GOV/2554, November 12, 1991. 84 Ibid. Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service 21 Appendix C. Extended Remarks by William Foster Regarding Possible NPT Article II Violations On July 10, 1968, then-Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Director William Foster testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee about the NPT. In response to a question regarding the type of nuclear activities prohibited by Article II of the treaty, Foster supplied the following statement: Extension of Remarks by Mr. Foster in Response to Question Regarding Nuclear Explosive Devices The treaty articles in question are Article II, in which non-nuclear-weapon parties undertake “not to manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices,” and Article IV, which provides that nothing in the Treaty is to be interpreted as affecting the right of all Parties to the Treaty “to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes…in conformity with Articles I and II of this Treaty.” In the course of the negotiation of the Treaty, United States representatives were asked their views on what would constitute the “manufacture” of a nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device under Article II of the draft treaty. Our reply was as follows: “While the general intent of this provision seems clear, and its application to cases such as those discussed below should present little difficulty, the United States believe [sic] it is not possible at this time to formulate a comprehensive definition or interpretation. There are many hypothetical situations which might be imagined and it is doubtful that any general definition or interpretation, unrelated to specific fact situations could satisfactorily deal with all such situations. “Some general observations can be made with respect to the question of whether or not a specific activity constitutes prohibited manufacture under the proposed treaty. For example, facts indicating that the purpose of a particular activity was the acquisition of a nuclear explosive device would tend to show non-compliance. (Thus, the construction of an experimental or prototype nuclear explosive device would be covered by the term ‘manufacture’ as would be the production of components which could only have relevance to a nuclear explosive device.) Again, while the placing of a particular activity under safeguards would not, in and of itself, settle the question of whether that activity was in compliance with the treaty, it would of course be helpful in allaying any suspicion of non-compliance. “It may be useful to point out, for illustrative purposes, several activities which the United States would not consider per se to be violations of the prohibitions in Article II. Neither uranium enrichment nor the stockpiling of fissionable material in connection with a peaceful program would violate Article II so long as these activities were safeguarded under Article III. Also clearly permitted would be the development, under safeguards, of plutonium fueled power reactors, including research on the properties of metallic plutonium, nor would Article II interfere with the development or use of fast breeder reactors under safeguards.” Iran’s Nuclear Program: Tehran’s Compliance with International Obligations Congressional Research Service R40094 · VERSION 101 · UPDATED 22 Author Information Paul K. Kerr Specialist in Nonproliferation Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 		2020-04-20T09:42:21-0400
Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Updated May 4, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov R44972 Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Summary The FFG(X) program is a Navy program to build a class of 20 guided-missile frigates (FFGs). Congress funded the procurement of the first FFG(X) in FY2020 at a cost of $1,281.2 million (i.e., about $1.3 billion). The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $1,053.1 million (i.e., about $1.1 billion) for the procurement of the second FFG(X). The Navy estimates that subsequent ships in the class will cost roughly $940 million each in then-year dollars. Four industry teams were competing for the FFG(X) program. On April 30, 2020, the Navy announced that it had awarded the FFG(X) contract to the team led by Fincantieri/Marinette Marine (F/MM) of Marinette, WI. F/MM was awarded a fixed-price incentive (firm target) contract for Detail Design and Construction (DD&C) for up to 10 ships in the program—the lead ship plus nine option ships. The other three industry teams reportedly competing for the program were led by Austal USA of Mobile, AL; General Dynamics/Bath Iron Works (GD/BIW) of Bath, ME; and Huntington Ingalls Industries/Ingalls Shipbuilding (HII/Ingalls) of Pascagoula, MS. Under the DD&C contact awarded to F/MM, Navy has the option of recompeting the FFG(X) program after the lead ship (if none of the nine option ships are exercised), after the 10th ship (if all nine of the option ships are exercised), or somewhere in between (if some but not all of the nine option ships are exercised). All four competing industry teams were required to submit bids based on an existing ship design—an approach called the parent-design approach. F/MM’s design is based on an Italian frigate design called the FREMM (Fregata Europea Multi-Missione). As part of its action on the Navy’s FY2020 budget, Congress passed two legislative provisions relating to U.S. content requirements for certain components of each FFG(X). The FFG(X) program presents several potential oversight issues for Congress, including the following:  the potential impact of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation on the execution of U.S. military shipbuilding programs, including the FGFG(X) program;  the accuracy of the Navy’s estimated unit procurement cost for the FFG(X), particularly when compared to the known unit procurement costs of other recent U.S. surface combatants;  whether to fund the procurement in FY2021 of one FFG(X) (the Navy’s request), no FFG(X), or two FFG(X)s;  whether to build FFG(X)s at a single shipyard at any one time (the Navy’s baseline plan), or at two or three shipyards;  whether the Navy has appropriately defined the required capabilities and growth margin of the FFG(X).  whether to take any further legislative action regarding U.S. content requirements for FFG(X)s;  technical risk in the FFG(X) program;  the potential industrial-base impacts of the FFG(X) program for shipyards and supplier firms in the context of other Navy and Coast Guard shipbuilding programs. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Background ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Navy’s Force of Small Surface Combatants (SSCs) ................................................................. 1 U.S. Navy Frigates in General .................................................................................................. 1 FFG(X) Program ....................................................................................................................... 3 Meaning of Designation FFG(X) ........................................................................................ 3 Procurement Quantities and Schedule ................................................................................ 3 Ship Capabilities, Design, and Crewing ............................................................................. 5 Procurement Cost ................................................................................................................ 7 Acquisition Strategy............................................................................................................ 8 U.S. Content Requirements for Components ...................................................................... 9 Competing Industry Teams ............................................................................................... 10 Detail Design and Construction (DD&C) Contract ........................................................... 11 Contract Award ................................................................................................................. 12 Design Selected for FFG(X) Program .............................................................................. 12 Program Funding .............................................................................................................. 13 Issues for Congress ........................................................................................................................ 13 Potential Impact of COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Situation ........................................................ 13 Accuracy of Navy’s Estimated Unit Procurement Cost .......................................................... 14 Number of FFG(X)s to Procure in FY2021 ............................................................................ 16 Number of FFG(X) Builders ................................................................................................... 17 U.S. Content Requirements ..................................................................................................... 17 Required Capabilities and Growth Margin ............................................................................. 18 Analytical Basis for Desired Ship Capabilities ................................................................. 18 Number of VLS Tubes ...................................................................................................... 18 Growth Margin .................................................................................................................. 19 Technical Risk ......................................................................................................................... 20 May 2019 GAO Report ..................................................................................................... 20 Guaranty vs. Warranty in Construction Contract .............................................................. 21 Potential Industrial-Base Impacts of FFG(X) Program ........................................................... 23 Legislative Activity for FY2021 .................................................................................................... 24 Summary of Congressional Action on FY2021 Funding Request .......................................... 24 Figures Figure 1. Oliver Hazard Perry (FFG-7) Class Frigate ..................................................................... 2 Figure 2. Navy Briefing Slide on Surface Force Architecture ........................................................ 4 Figure 3. Navy Briefing Slide on FFG(X) Capabilities ................................................................... 6 Figure 4. Oliver Hazard Perry (FFG-7) Class Frigate ................................................................... 13 Tables Table 1. Programmed Annual FFG(X) Procurement Quantities ..................................................... 5 Table 2. Industry Teams Reportedly Competing for FFG(X) Program .......................................... 11 Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Table 3. FFG(X) Program Procurement Funding .......................................................................... 13 Table 4. Congressional Action on FY2021 Procurement Funding Request .................................. 24 Appendixes Appendix A. Navy Briefing Slides from July 25, 2017, FFG(X) Industry Day Event.................. 25 Appendix B. Competing Industry Teams ...................................................................................... 31 Contacts Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 33 Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction This report provides background information and discusses potential issues for Congress regarding the Navy’s FFG(X) program, a program to procure a new class of 20 guided-missile frigates (FFGs). The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $1,053.1 million (i.e., about $1.1 billion) for the procurement of the second FFG(X). The FFG(X) program presents several potential oversight issues for Congress. Congress’s decisions on the program could affect Navy capabilities and funding requirements and the shipbuilding industrial base. This report focuses on the FFG(X) program. Other CRS reports discuss the strategic context within which the FFG(X) program and other Navy acquisition programs may be considered.1 Background Navy’s Force of Small Surface Combatants (SSCs) In discussing its force-level goals and 30-year shipbuilding plans, the Navy organizes its surface combatants into large surface combatants (LSCs), meaning the Navy’s cruisers and destroyers, and small surface combatants (SSCs), meaning the Navy’s frigates, LCSs, mine warfare ships, and patrol craft.2 SSCs are smaller, less capable in some respects, and individually less expensive to procure, operate, and support than LSCs. SSCs can operate in conjunction with LSCs and other Navy ships, particularly in higher-threat operating environments, or independently, particularly in lower-threat operating environments. In December 2016, the Navy released a goal to achieve and maintain a Navy of 355 ships, including 52 SSCs, of which 32 are to be LCSs and 20 are to be FFG(X)s. Although patrol craft are SSCs, they do not count toward the 52-ship SSC force-level goal, because patrol craft are not considered battle force ships, which are the kind of ships that count toward the quoted size of the Navy and the Navy’s force-level goal.3 At the end of FY2019 the Navy’s force of SSCs totaled 30 battle force ships, including 0 frigates, 19 LCSs, and 11 mine warfare ships. Under the Navy’s FY2020 30-year (FY2020-FY2049) shipbuilding plan, the SSC force is to grow to 52 ships (34 LCSs and 18 FFG[X]s) by FY2034. U.S. Navy Frigates in General In contrast to cruisers and destroyers, which are designed to operate in higher-threat areas, frigates are generally intended to operate more in lower-threat areas. U.S. Navy frigates perform many of the same peacetime and wartime missions as U.S. Navy cruisers and destroyers, but since frigates are intended to do so in lower-threat areas, they are equipped with fewer weapons, 1 See CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke; CRS Report R43838, Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke; and CRS Report R44891, U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke and Michael Moodie. 2 See, for example, CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 3 For additional discussion of battle force ships, see CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 2 less-capable radars and other systems, and less engineering redundancy and survivability than cruisers and destroyers.4 The most recent class of frigates operated by the Navy was the Oliver Hazard Perry (FFG-7) class (Figure 1). A total of 51 FFG-7 class ships were procured between FY1973 and FY1984. The ships entered service between 1977 and 1989, and were decommissioned between 1994 and 2015. In their final configuration, FFG-7s were about 455 feet long and had full load displacements of roughly 3,900 tons to 4,100 tons. (By comparison, the Navy’s Arleigh Burke [DDG-51] class destroyers are about 510 feet long and have full load displacements of roughly 9,700 tons.)5Following their decommissioning, a number of FFG-7 class ships, like certain other decommissioned U.S. Navy ships, have been transferred to the navies of U.S. allied and partner countries. Figure 1. Oliver Hazard Perry (FFG-7) Class Frigate Source: Photograph accompanying Dave Werner, “Fighting Forward: Last Oliver Perry Class Frigate Deployment,” Navy Live, January 5, 2015, accessed September 21, 2017, at http://navylive.dodlive.mil/2015/01/05/fighting-forward-last-oliver-perry-class-frigate-deployment/. 4 Compared to cruisers and destroyers, frigates can be a more cost-effective way to perform missions that do not require the use of a higher-cost cruiser or destroyer. In the past, the Navy’s combined force of higher-capability, higher-cost cruisers and destroyers and lower-capability, lower-cost frigates has been referred to as an example of a so-called high-low force mix. High-low mixes have been used by the Navy and the other military services in recent decades as a means of balancing desires for individual platform capability against desires for platform numbers in a context of varied missions and finite resources. Peacetime missions performed by frigates can include, among other things, engagement with allied and partner navies, maritime security operations (such as anti-piracy operations), and humanitarian assistance and disaster response (HA/DR) operations. Intended wartime operations of frigates include escorting (i.e., protecting) military supply and transport ships and civilian cargo ships that are moving through potentially dangerous waters. In support of intended wartime operations, frigates are designed to conduct anti-air warfare (AAW—aka air defense) operations, anti-surface warfare (ASuW) operations (meaning operations against enemy surface ships and craft), and antisubmarine warfare (ASW) operations. U.S. Navy frigates are designed to operate in larger Navy formations or as solitary ships. Operations as solitary ships can include the peacetime operations mentioned above. 5 This is the displacement for the current (Flight III) version of the DDG-51 design. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 3 FFG(X) Program Meaning of Designation FFG(X) In the program designation FFG(X), FF means frigate,6 G means guided-missile ship (indicating a ship equipped with an area-defense anti-air warfare [AAW] system),7 and (X) indicates that the specific design of the ship has not yet been determined. FFG(X) thus means a guided-missile frigate whose specific design has not yet been determined.8 Procurement Quantities and Schedule Total Procurement Quantity The Navy wants to procure 20 FFG(X)s, which in combination with the Navy’s required total of 32 LCSs would meet the Navy’s 52-ship SSC force-level goal. Thirty-five (rather than 32) LCSs were procured through FY2019, but Navy officials have stated that the Navy nevertheless wants to procure 20 FFG(X)s. The Navy’s 355-ship force-level goal is the result of a Force Structure Analysis (FSA) that the Navy conducted in 2016. The Navy conducts a new or updated FSA every few years, and it is currently conducting a new FSA that is scheduled to be released sometime during 2020. Navy officials have stated that this new FSA will likely not reduce the required number of small surface combatants, and might increase it. Navy officials have also suggested that the Navy in coming years may shift to a new surface force architecture that will include, among other things, a larger proportion of small surface combatants. Figure 2 shows a Navy briefing slide depicting the potential new surface force architecture, with each sphere representing a manned ship or an unmanned surface vehicle (USV). Consistent with Figure 2, the Navy’s 355-ship goal, reflecting the current force architecture, calls for a Navy with twice as many large surface combatants as small surface combatants. Figure 2 suggests that the potential new surface force architecture could lead to the obverse—a planned force mix that calls for twice as many small surface combatants than large surface combatants—along with a new third tier of numerous USVs.9 Such a force mix, in theory at least, suggests that the Navy might increase the total planned number of FFG(X)s from 20 to some higher number. 6 The designation FF, with two Fs, means frigate in the same way that the designation DD, with two Ds, means destroyer. FF is sometimes translated less accurately as fast frigate. FFs, however, are not particularly fast by the standards of U.S. Navy combatants—their maximum sustained speed, for example, is generally lower than that of U.S. Navy aircraft carriers, cruisers, and destroyers. In addition, there is no such thing in the U.S. Navy as a slow frigate. 7 Some U.S. Navy surface combatants are equipped with a point-defense AAW system, meaning a short-range AAW system that is designed to protect the ship itself. Other U.S. Navy surface combatants are equipped with an area-defense AAW system, meaning a longer-range AAW system that is designed to protect no only the ship itself, but other ships in the area as well. U.S. Navy surface combatants equipped with an area-defense AAW system are referred to as guided-missile ships and have a “G” in their designation. 8 When the ship’s design has been determined, the program’s designation might be changed to the FFG-62 program, since FFG-61 was the final ship in the FFG-7 program. It is also possible, however, that the Navy could choose a different designation for the program at that point. Based on Navy decisions involving the Seawolf (SSN-21) class attack submarine and the Zumwalt (DDG-1000) class destroyer, other possibilities might include FFG-1000, FFG-2000, or FFG-2100. (A designation of FFG-21, however, might cause confusion, as FFG-21 was used for Flatley, an FFG-7 class ship.) A designation of FFG-62 would be consistent with traditional Navy practices for ship class designations. 9 For additional discussion of this possible change in surface force architecture, see CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 4 Figure 2. Navy Briefing Slide on Surface Force Architecture Each sphere represents a ship or a USV Source: Illustration accompanying Megan Eckstein, “Sea Hunter Unmanned Ship Continues Autonomy Testing as NAVSEA Moves Forward with Draft RFP,” USNI News, April 29, 2019. The illustration was also included as Slide 2 in a Navy briefing entitled “Designing & Building the Surface Fleet: Unmanned and Small Combatants,” by Rear Admiral Casey Moton at a June 20, 2019, conference of the American Society of Naval Engineers (ASNE). Notes: Each sphere represents a ship or a USV. LSC means large surface combatant (i.e., cruiser or destroyer); SSC means small surface combatant (i.e., frigate or Littoral Combat Ship); LUSV means large USV; MUSV means medium USV. Spheres with multiple colors (the LSCs and SSCs) are ships equipped with a combination of sensors (green), command and control (C2) equipment (red), and payloads (including weapons) (blue). Spheres with single colors (the USVs) are equipped with either payloads (blue) or sensors (green). An April 20, 2020, press report stated (emphasis added): An internal Office of the Secretary of Defense assessment calls for the Navy to cut two aircraft carriers from its fleet, freeze the large surface combatant fleet of destroyers and cruisers around current levels and add dozens of unmanned or lightly manned ships to the inventory, according to documents obtained by Defense News. The study calls for a fleet of nine carriers, down from the current fleet of 11, and for 65 unmanned or lightly manned surface vessels. The study calls for a surface force of between 80 and 90 large surface combatants, and an increase in the number of small surface combatants—between 55 and 70, which is substantially more than the Navy currently operates. The assessment is part of an ongoing DoD-wide review of Navy force structure and seem to echo what Defense Secretary Mark Esper has been saying for months: the Defense Department wants to begin de-emphasizing aircraft carriers as the centerpiece of the Navy's Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 5 force projection and put more emphasis on unmanned technologies that can be more easily sacrificed in a conflict and can achieve their missions more affordably…. There are about 90 cruisers and destroyers in the fleet: the study recommended retaining at least 80 but keeping about as many as the Navy currently operates at the high end. The Navy’s small surface combatant program is essentially the 20 littoral combat ships in commission today, with another 15 under contract, as well as the 20 next-generation frigates, which would get to the minimum number in the assessment of 55 small combatants, with the additional 15 presumably being more frigates.10 Annual Procurement Quantities Congress funded the procurement of the first FFG(X) in FY2020. The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission calls for the next nine to be procured during the period FY2021-FY2025 in annual quantities of 1-1-2-2-3. Table 1 compares programmed annual procurement quantities for the FFG(X) program in FY2021-FY2025 under the Navy’s FY2020 and FY2021 budget submissions. The programmed quantity of three ships in FY2025 under the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission suggests that the Navy, perhaps as a consequence of a potential new surface architecture like that shown in Figure 2, might increase FFG(X) procurement to a sustained rate of 3 or more ships per year starting in FY2025. Table 1. Programmed Annual FFG(X) Procurement Quantities As shown in Navy’s FY2020 and FY2021 budget submissions FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24 FY25 Total FY21-FY25 FY2020 budget 2 2 2 2 2 10 FY2021 budget 1 1 2 2 3 9 Source: Table prepared by CRS based on Navy’s FY2020 and FY2021 budget submissions. Ship Capabilities, Design, and Crewing Ship Capabilities and Design The Navy envisages the FFG(X) as follows:  The ship is to be a multimission small surface combatant capable of conducting anti-air warfare (AAW), anti-surface warfare (ASuW), antisubmarine warfare (ASW), and electromagnetic warfare (EMW) operations.  Compared to an FF concept that emerged under a February 2014 restructuring of the LCS program, the FFG(X) is to have increased AAW and EMW capability, and enhanced survivability.  The ship’s area-defense AAW system is to be capable of local area AAW, meaning a form of area-defense AAW that extends to a lesser range than the area-defense AAW that can be provided by the Navy’s cruisers and destroyers. 10 David B. Larter, “Defense Department Study Calls for Cutting 2 of the US Navy’s Aircraft Carriers,” Defense News, April 20, 2020. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 6  The ship is to be capable of operating in both blue water (i.e., mid-ocean) and littoral (i.e., near-shore) areas.  The ship is to be capable of operating either independently (when that is appropriate for its assigned mission) or as part of larger Navy formations. Figure 3 shows a January 2019 Navy briefing slide summarizing the FFG(X)’s planned capabilities. For additional information on the FFG(X)’s planned capabilities, see Appendix A.11 Figure 3. Navy Briefing Slide on FFG(X) Capabilities Presented at Surface Navy Association National Symposium, January 2019 Source: Presentation by Dr. Reagan Campbell, “FFG(X) Update, National Symposium—Surface Navy Association,” January 15, 2019, briefing slide 3, posted at InsideDefense.com (subscription required), January 22, 2019. 11 RFI: FFG(X) - US Navy Guided Missile Frigate Replacement Program, accessed August 11, 2017, at https://www.fbo.gov/index?s=opportunity&mode=form&tab=core&id=d089cf61f254538605cdec5438955b8e&_cview=0. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 7 Dual Crewing To help maximize the time that each ship spends at sea, the Navy reportedly is considering operating FFG(X)s with dual crews—an approach, commonly called blue-gold crewing, that the Navy uses for operating its ballistic missile submarines and LCSs.12 Procurement Cost Congress funded the procurement of the first FFG(X) in FY2020 at a cost of $1,281.2 million (i.e., about $1.3 billion). The lead ship in the program will be more expensive than the follow-on ships in the program because the lead ship’s procurement cost incorporates most or all of the detailed design/nonrecurring engineering (DD/NRE) costs for the class. (It is a traditional Navy budgeting practice to attach most or all of the DD/NRE costs for a new ship class to the procurement cost of the lead ship in the class.) The Navy wants the follow-on ships in the FFG(X) program (i.e., ships 2 through 20) to have an average unit procurement cost of $800 million to $950 million each in constant 2018 dollars.13 By way of comparison, the Navy estimates the average unit procurement cost of the three LCSs procured in FY2019 at $523.7 million (not including the cost of each ship’s embarked mission package), and the average unit procurement cost of the two DDG-51 class destroyers that the Navy has requested for procurement in FY2021 at $1,918.5 million. As shown in Table 3, the Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $1,053.1 million (i.e., about $1.1 billion) for the procurement of the second FFG(X), and estimates that subsequent ships in the class will cost roughly $940 million each in then-year dollars. The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates the total procurement cost of 20 FFG(X)s at $19,814.8 million (i.e., about $19.8 billion) in then-year dollars, or an average of about $990.7 million each. Since the figure of 12 See, for example, David B. Larter, “The US Navy Is Planning for Its New Frigate to Be a Workhorse,” Defense News, January 30, 2018. 13 See Sam LaGrone, “NAVSEA: New Navy Frigate Could Cost $950M Per Hull,” USNI News, January 9, 2018; Richard Abott, “Navy Confirms New Frigate Nearly $1 Billion Each, 4-6 Concept Awards By Spring,” Defense Daily, January 10, 2018: 1; Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “Navy Says It Can Buy Frigate For Under $800M: Acquisition Reform Testbed,” Breaking Defense, January 12, 2018; Lee Hudson, “Navy to Downselect to One Vendor for Future Frigate Competition,” Inside the Navy, January 15, 2018; Richard Abott, “Navy Aims For $800 Million Future Frigate Cost, Leveraging Modularity and Commonality,” Defense Daily, January 17, 2018: 3. The $800 million figure is the objective cost target; the $950 million figure is threshold cost target. Regarding the $950 million figure, the Navy states that The average follow threshold cost for FFG(X) has been established at $950 million (CY18$). The Navy expects that the full and open competition will provide significant downward cost pressure incentivizing industry to balance cost and capability to provide the Navy with a best value solution. FFG(X) cost estimates will be reevaluated during the Conceptual Design phase to ensure the program stays within the Navy’s desired budget while achieving the desired warfighting capabilities. Lead ship unit costs will be validated at the time the Component Cost Position is established in 3rd QTR FY19 prior to the Navy awarding the Detail Design and Construction contract. (Navy information paper dated November 7, 2017, provided by Navy Office of Legislative Affairs to CRS and CBO on November 8, 2017.) The Navy wants the average basic construction cost (BCC) of ships 2 through 20 in the program to be $495 million per ship in constant 2018 dollars. BCC excludes costs for government furnished combat or weapon systems and change orders. (Source: Navy briefing slides for FFG(X) Industry Day, November 17, 2017, slide 11 of 16, entitled “Key Framing Assumptions.”) Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 8 $19,814.8 million is a then-year dollar figure, it incorporates estimated annual inflation for FFG(X)s to be procured several years into the future. Acquisition Strategy Parent-Design Approach The Navy’s plan to procure the first FFG(X) in FY2020 did not allow enough time to develop a completely new design (i.e., a clean-sheet design) for the FFG(X).14 Consequently, the FFG(X) is to be built to a modified version of an existing ship design—an approach called the parent-design approach. The parent design can be a U.S. ship design or a foreign ship design.15 Using the parent-design approach can reduce design time, design cost, and cost, schedule, and technical risk in building the ship. The Coast Guard and the Navy are currently using the parent-design approach for the Coast Guard’s Polar Security Cutter (i.e., polar icebreaker) program.16 The parent-design approach has also been used in the past for other Navy and Coast Guard ships, including Navy mine warfare ships17 and the Coast Guard’s new Fast Response Cutters (FRCs).18 No New Technologies or Systems As an additional measure for reducing cost, schedule, and technical risk in the FFG(X) program, the Navy envisages developing no new technologies or systems for the FFG(X)—the ship is to use systems and technologies that already exist or are already being developed for use in other programs. Number of Builders The Navy’s baseline plan for the FFG(X) program envisages using a single builder at any one time to build the ships. The Navy has not, however, ruled out the option of building the ships at two or three shipyards at the same time. Consistent with U.S. law,19 the ship is to be built in a shipyard located in the United States, even if it is based on a foreign design. 14 The Navy states that using an acquisition strategy involving a lengthier requirements-evaluation phase and a clean-sheet design would defer the procurement of the first ship to FY2025. (Source: Slide 3, entitled “Accelerating the FFG(X),” in a Navy briefing entitled “Designing & Building the Surface Fleet: Unmanned and Small Combatants,” by Rear Admiral Casey Moton at a June 20, 2019, conference of the American Society of Naval Engineers [ASNE].) 15 For articles about reported potential parent designs for the FFG(X), see, for example, Chuck Hill, “OPC Derived Frigate? Designed for the Royal Navy, Proposed for USN,” Chuck Hill’s CG [Coast Guard] Blog, September 15, 2017; David B. Larter, “BAE Joins Race for New US Frigate with Its Type 26 Vessel,” Defense News, September 14, 2017; “BMT Venator-110 Frigate Scale Model at DSEI 2017,” Navy Recognition, September 13, 2017; David B. Larter, “As the Service Looks to Fill Capabilities Gaps, the US Navy Eyes Foreign Designs,” Defense News, September 1, 2017; Lee Hudson, “HII May Offer National Security Cutter for Navy Future Frigate Competition,” Inside the Navy, August 7, 2017; Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “Beyond LCS: Navy Looks To Foreign Frigates, National Security Cutter,” Breaking Defense, May 11, 2017. 16 For more on the polar security cutter program, including the parent-design approach, see CRS Report RL34391, Coast Guard Polar Security Cutter (Polar Icebreaker) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 17 The Navy’s Osprey (MCM-51) class mine warfare ships are an enlarged version of the Italian Lerici-class mine warfare ships. 18 The FRC design is based on a Dutch patrol boat design, the Damen Stan Patrol Boat 4708. 19 10 U.S.C. 8679 requires that, subject to a presidential waiver for the national security interest, “no vessel to be constructed for any of the armed forces, and no major component of the hull or superstructure of any such vessel, may Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 9 U.S. Content Requirements for Components FY2020 Legislation As part of its action on the Navy’s FY2020 budget, Congress passed two provisions relating to U.S. content requirements for certain components of each FFG(X). Section 856 of the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (S. 1790/P.L. 116-92 of December 20, 2019) states SEC. 856. APPLICATION OF LIMITATION ON PROCUREMENT OF GOODS OTHER THAN UNITED STATES GOODS TO THE FFG–FRIGATE PROGRAM. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, amounts authorized to carry out the FFG–Frigate Program may be used to award a new contract that provides for the acquisition of the following components regardless of whether those components are manufactured in the United States: (1) Auxiliary equipment (including pumps) for shipboard services. (2) Propulsion equipment (including engines, reduction gears, and propellers). (3) Shipboard cranes. (4) Spreaders for shipboard cranes. Section 8113(b) of the FY2020 DOD Appropriations Act (Division A of H.R. 1158/P.L. 116-93 of December 20, 2019) states SEC. 8113…. (b) None of the funds provided in this Act for the FFG(X) Frigate program shall be used to award a new contract that provides for the acquisition of the following components unless those components are manufactured in the United States: Air circuit breakers; gyrocompasses; electronic navigation chart systems; steering controls; pumps; propulsion and machinery control systems; totally enclosed lifeboats; auxiliary equipment pumps; shipboard cranes; auxiliary chill water systems; and propulsion propellers: Provided, That the Secretary of the Navy shall in corporate United States manufactured propulsion engines and propulsion reduction gears into the FFG(X) Frigate program beginning not later than with the eleventh ship of the program. Additional Statute and Legislation In addition to the two above provisions, a permanent statute—10 U.S.C. 2534—requires certain components of U.S. Navy ships to be made by a manufacturer in the national technology and industrial base. In addition, the paragraph in the annual DOD appropriations act that makes appropriations for the Navy’s shipbuilding account (i.e., the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy, or SCN, appropriation account) has in recent years included this proviso: be constructed in a foreign shipyard.” In addition, the paragraph in the annual DOD appropriations act that makes appropriations for the Navy’s shipbuilding account (the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy account) typically contains these provisos: “ ... Provided further, That none of the funds provided under this heading for the construction or conversion of any naval vessel to be constructed in shipyards in the United States shall be expended in foreign facilities for the construction of major components of such vessel: Provided further, That none of the funds provided under this heading shall be used for the construction of any naval vessel in foreign shipyards.... ” Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 10 … Provided further, That none of the funds provided under this heading for the construction or conversion of any naval vessel to be constructed in shipyards in the United States shall be expended in foreign facilities for the construction of major components of such vessel…. 10 U.S.C. 2534 explicitly applies to certain ship components, but not others. The meaning of “major components” in the above proviso from the annual DOD appropriations act might be subject to interpretation. Navy Perspective on FY2020 Legislative Provisions Regarding the two FY2020 legislative provisions discussed above, the Navy states: In order to comply with the law, the FFG(X) Detail Design & Construction (DD&C) Request For Proposal (RFP) Statement of Work (SOW) was amended to include the following requirements: C.2.21 Manufacture of Certain Components in the United States “Per Section 8113(b) of Public Law 116-93: Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020, the Contractor shall ensure that the following components are manufactured in the United States for each FFG(X) ship: air circuit breakers; gyrocompasses; electronic navigation chart systems; steering controls; pumps; propulsion and machinery control systems; totally enclosed lifeboats; auxiliary equipment pumps; shipboard cranes; auxiliary chill water systems; and propulsion propellers.” C.2.22 Engine and Reduction Gear Study (Item 0100 only) “The Contractor shall conduct and develop an Engine and Reduction Gear Study (CDRL A019) documenting the impacts of incorporating United States manufactured propulsion engines and propulsion reduction gears into the FFG(X) design starting with the fourth, sixth, eighth, tenth, and eleventh FFG(X) ship.” The Navy has assessed the impact of implementing the first part of Section 8113(b) of Public Law 116-93: Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020, which states “None of the funds provided in this Act for the FFG(X) Frigate program shall be used to award a new contract that provides for the acquisition of the following components unless those components are manufactured in the United States: Air circuit breakers; gyrocompasses; electronic navigation chart systems; steering controls; pumps; propulsion and machinery control systems; totally enclosed lifeboats; auxiliary equipment pumps; shipboard cranes; auxiliary chill water systems; and propulsion propellers,” for prospective shipbuilders and has determined the impact is low. The impact of the second part of Section 8113(b) of Public Law 116-93: Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020, which states “That the Secretary of the Navy shall incorporate United States manufactured propulsion engines and propulsion reduction gears into the FFG(X) Frigate program beginning not later than with the eleventh ship of the program,” is unknown at this time. After DD&C contract award, the impact study from the selected FFG(X) shipbuilder will be delivered to the Navy. The Navy will use these impacts to develop the requested report to Congress no later than six months after contract award.20 Competing Industry Teams As shown in Table 2, four industry teams competed for the FFG(X) program. Two of the teams—one including Fincantieri/Marinette Marine (F/MM) of Marinette, WI, and another including 20 Navy information paper on FFG(X) program dated March 27, 2020, provided to CRS and CBO by Navy Office of legislative Affairs, April 14, 2020. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 11 General Dynamics/Bath Iron Works (GD/BIW) of Bath, ME—used European frigate designs as their parent design. A third team—a team including Austal USA of Mobile, AL—used the Navy’s Independence (LCS-2) class Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) design, which Austal USA currently builds, as its parent design. A fourth team—a team including Huntington Ingalls Industries/Ingalls Shipbuilding (HII/Ingalls) of Pascagoula, MS—has not disclosed what parent design it used. For additional background information on the competing industry teams, see Appendix B. Table 2. Industry Teams Reportedly Competing for FFG(X) Program Industry team leader Parent design Shipyard that would build the ships Austal USA Independence (LCS-2) class LCS design Austal USA of Mobile, AL Fincantieri Marine Group Italian Fincantieri FREMM (Fregata Europea Multi-Missione) frigate Fincantieri/Marinette Marine (F/MM) of Marinette, WI General Dynamics/Bath Iron Works Spanish Navantia Álvaro de Bazán-class F100 frigate General Dynamics/Bath Iron Works (GD/BIW) of Bath, ME Huntington Ingalls Industries [Not disclosed] Huntington Ingalls Industries/ Ingalls Shipbuilding (HII/Ingalls) of Pascagoula, MS Source: Sam LaGrone and Megan Eckstein, “Navy Picks Five Contenders for Next Generation Frigate FFG(X) Program,” USNI News, February 16, 2018; Sam LaGrone, “Lockheed Martin Won’t Submit Freedom LCS Design for FFG(X) Contest,” USNI News, May 28, 2019. See also David B. Larter, “Navy Awards Design Contracts for Future Frigate,” Defense News, February 16, 2018; Lee Hudson, “Navy Awards Five Conceptual Design Contracts for Future Frigate Competition,” Inside the Navy, February 19, 2018. Detail Design and Construction (DD&C) Contract The FFG(X) contract that the four industry teams competed for is a Detail Design and Construction (DD&C) contract for up to 10 ships in the program—the lead ship plus nine option ships. Under such a contract, the Navy has the option of recompeting the program after the lead ship (if none of the nine option ships are exercised), after the 10th ship (if all nine of the option ships are exercised), or somewhere in between (if some but not all of the nine option ships are exercised). As a means of reducing their procurement cost, the Navy may convert the DD&C contract into a multiyear contract known as a block buy contract to procure the ships.21 The request for proposals (RFP) for the DD&C contract stated: “Following contract award, the Government may designate any or all of [the nine option ships] as part of a ‘Block Buy.’ In the event that a Block Buy is enacted under the National Defense Authorization Act in future fiscal years, the Contractor shall enter into negotiations with the Government to determine a fair and reasonable price for each item under the Block Buy. The price of any ship designated as part of the Block Buy shall not exceed the corresponding non-Block Buy price.”22 21 For more on block buy contracting, see CRS Report R41909, Multiyear Procurement (MYP) and Block Buy Contracting in Defense Acquisition: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 22 FFG(X) Guided Missile Frigate Detail Design & Construction, Solicitation Number: N0002419R2300, June 20, 2019, p. 51 of 320, accessed June 25, 2019, at https://www.fbo.gov/index?s=opportunity&mode=form&id=d7203a2dd8010b79ef62e67ee7850083&tab=core&_cview=1. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 12 Contract Award Under the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission, the DD&C contract was scheduled to be awarded in July 2020. The Navy, however, moved up the date for awarding the contract and announced on April 30, 2020, that it had awarded the FFG(X) contract to the industry team led by F/MM. The contract award announcement states: Marinette Marine Corp., Marinette, Wisconsin, is awarded a $795,116,483 fixed-price incentive (firm target) contract for detail design and construction (DD&C) of the FFG(X) class of guided-missile frigates, with additional firm-fixed-price and cost reimbursement line items. The contract with options will provide for the delivery of up to 10 FFG(X) ships, post-delivery availability support, engineering and class services, crew familiarization, training equipment and provisioned item orders. If all options are exercised, the cumulative value of this contract will be $5,576,105,441. Work will be performed at multiple locations, including Marinette, Wisconsin (52%); Boston, Massachusetts (10%); Crozet, Virginia (8%); New Orleans, Louisiana (7%); New York, New York (6%); Washington, D.C. (6%), Sturgeon Bay, Wisconsin (3%), Prussia, Pennsylvania (3%), Minneapolis, Minnesota (2%); Cincinnati, Ohio (1%); Atlanta, Georgia (1%); and Chicago, Illinois (1%). The base contract includes the DD&C of the first FFG(X) ship and separately priced options for nine additional ships…. Fiscal 2020 shipbuilding and conversion (Navy) funding in the amount of $795,116,483 will be obligated at time of award and will not expire at the end of the current fiscal year. This contract was competitively procured via the Federal Business Opportunities website and four offers were received. The Navy conducted this competition using a tradeoff process to determine the proposal representing the best value, based on the evaluation of non-price factors in conjunction with price. The Navy made the best value determination by considering the relative importance of evaluation factors as set forth in the solicitation, where the non-price factors of design and design maturity and objective performance (to achieve warfighting capability) were approximately equal and each more important than remaining factors.23 Design Selected for FFG(X) Program Figure 4 shows an artist’s rendering of F/MM’s design for the FFG(X). As shown in Table 2, F/MM’s design for the FFG(X) is based on the design of Fincantieri’s FREMM (Fregata Europea Multi-Missione) frigate, a ship that has been built in two variants, one for the Italian navy and one for the French navy. F/MM officials state that its FFG(X) design is based on the Italian variant, which has a length of 474.4 feet, a beam of 64.6 feet, a draft of 28.5 feet (including the bow sonar bulb), and a displacement of 6,900 tons.24 F/MM’s FFG(X) design is slightly longer and heavier—it has a length of 496 feet, a beam of 65 feet, a draft of 23 to 24 feet (there is no bow sonar bulb), and an estimated displacement of 7,400 tons, or about 76% as much as the displacement of a Flight III DDG-51 destroyer.25 23 Department of Defense, “Contracts For April 30, 2020,” accessed April 30, 2020, at https://www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Contracts/Contract/Article/2171906/. See also PEO USC Public Affairs, “US Navy Awards Guided Missile Frigate (FFG(X)) Contract,” Navy News Service, April 30, 2020. 24 Source: Ministero Della Difesa [Ministry of Defense], “Fregate Europee Multi Missione—FREMM,” version archived October 25, 2014, accessed May 3, 2020, at https://web.archive.org/web/20141025045603/http://www.marina.difesa.it/conosciamoci/comandienti/log_amm/marinalles/Pagine/FREMM.aspx. 25 Sources for length and beam: Fincantieri/Marinette Marine, “FFG(X) Guided Missile Frigate of the Future,” undated, accessed May 3, 2020, at https://fincantierimarinegroup.com/products/navy/ffgx/. Source for draft and displacement: Defense & Aerospace Report interview with Chuck Goddard, Senior Vice President, Fincantieri Marine Group, posted Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 13 Figure 4. Oliver Hazard Perry (FFG-7) Class Frigate Artist’s rendering of F/MM design Source: Cropped version of photograph accompanying PEO USC Public Affairs, “US Navy Awards Guided Missile Frigate (FFG(X)) Contract,” Navy News Service, April 30, 2020. Program Funding Table 3 shows procurement funding for the FFG(X) program under the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission. Table 3. FFG(X) Program Procurement Funding Millions of then-year dollars, rounded to nearest tenth. FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24 FY25 Funding 1,053.1 954.5 1,865.9 1,868.8 2,817.3 (Quantity) (1) (1) (2) (2) (3) Avg. unit cost 1,053.1 954.5 933.0 934.4 939.1 Source: Table prepared by CRS based on Navy FY2021 budget submission. Issues for Congress Potential Impact of COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Situation One issue for Congress concerns the potential impact of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation on the execution of U.S. military shipbuilding programs, including the FFG(X) program. For additional discussion of this issue, see CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. January 26, 2020, accessed May 3, 2020, at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ObZzcdzIctc . The statement that the ship’s draft is 23 to 24 feet and that its displacement is 7,400 tons is at approximately 2:35 to 2:40. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 14 Accuracy of Navy’s Estimated Unit Procurement Cost Another potential issue for Congress concerns the accuracy of the Navy’s estimated unit procurement cost for the FFG(X), particularly when compared to the known unit procurement costs of other recent U.S. surface combatants. As detailed by CBO26 and GAO,27 lead ships in Navy shipbuilding programs in many cases have turned out to be more expensive to build than the Navy had estimated. If the lead ship in a shipbuilding program turns out to be intrinsically more expensive to build than the Navy estimated, the follow-on ships in the program will likely also be more expensive to build than the Navy estimated. As discussed earlier, the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates that the third and subsequent ships in the FFG(X) program will cost roughly $940 million each in then-year dollars to procure. This equates to a cost of about $127 million per thousand tons of full load displacement, a figure that is  about 36% less than the cost per thousand tons of full load displacement of the Flight III DDG-51;  about 15% less than the cost per thousand tons of full load displacement of the Freedom (LCS-1) variant of the Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) that F/MM currently builds; and  about 15% less than the cost per thousand tons of full load displacement of the Coast Guard’s National Security Cutter (NSC).28 Put another way, the FFG(X) has  an estimated full load displacement that is about 76% as great as that of the Flight III DDG-51, and an estimated unit procurement cost that is about 49% as great as that of the Flight III DDG-51;  an estimated full load displacement that is about 120% greater than that of the LCS-1 variant of the LCS, and an estimated unit procurement cost that is about 80% greater than that of the LCS-1 variant of the LCS; and  an estimated full load displacement that is about 64% greater than that of the Coast Guard’s National Security Cutter (NSC), and an estimated unit procurement cost that is about 40% greater than that of the NSC.29 Ships of the same general type and complexity that are built under similar production conditions tend to have similar costs per weight and consequently unit procurement costs that are more or less proportional to their displacements. Setting the estimated cost per thousand tons of displacement of the FFG(X) about equal to those of the LCS-1 variant of the LCS or the NSC would increase the estimated unit procurement cost of the third and subsequent FFG(X)s from the Navy’s estimate of about $940 million to an adjusted figure of about $1,100 million, an increase of about 17%. Setting the estimated cost per thousand tons of displacement of the FFG(X) about equal to that of the Flight III DDG-51 would increase the estimated unit procurement cost of the 26 See Congressional Budget Office, An Analysis of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2019 Shipbuilding Plan, October 2018, p. 25, including Figure 10. 27 See Government Accountability Office, Navy Shipbuilding[:] Past Performance Provides Valuable Lessons for Future Investments, GAO-18-238SP, June 2018, p. 8. 28 For more on the NSC program, see CRS Report R42567, Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 29 Source: CRS analysis of full load displacements and unit procurement costs of FFG(X), Flight III DDG-51, LCS-1 variant of the LCS, and the NSC. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 15 third and subsequent FFG(X)s from the Navy’s estimate of about $940 million to an adjusted figure of about $1,470 million, an increase of about 56%. Potential oversight questions for Congress include the following:  What is the Navy’s basis for its view that the FFG(X)—a ship about three-quarters as large as the Flight III DDG-51, and with installed capabilities that are in many cases similar to those of the DDG-51—can be procured for about one-half the cost of the Flight III DDG-51?  DDG-51s are procured using multiyear procurement (MYP), which reduces their procurement cost by several percent, while the FFG(X) DD&C contract is a contract with options, which operates as a form of annual contracting and consequently does not achieve the kinds of savings that are possible with an MYP contract.30 Would adjusting for this difference by assuming the use of annual contracting for procuring DDG-51s mean that the difference between the Flight III DDG-51 and the FFG(X) in cost per thousand tons displacement, other things held equal, is greater than the figure of 36% shown above?  What is the Navy’s basis for its view that the FFG(X)—a ship with a full collection of permanently installed combat system equipment—can be procured for a cost per thousand tons of full load displacement that is about 15% less than that of the LCS-1 variant of the LCS, a ship built by the same shipyard that features only a partial collection of permanently installed combat system equipment?31  What is the Navy’s basis for its view that the FFG(X)—a ship built to Navy combat survivability standards and featuring a full collection of installed Navy combat system equipment—can be procured for a cost per thousand tons of full load displacement that is 15% less than that of the NSC, a ship built to a Coast Guard rather than Navy combat-survivability standard and featuring a more-modest collection of combat system equipment?  To what degree can differences in costs for building ships at F/MM compared to costs for building ships at the shipyards that build DDG-51s and NSCs account for the FFG(X)’s lower estimated cost per thousand tons displacement?  To what degree can the larger size of the FFG(X) compared to the LCS-1 variant of the LCS or the NSC account for the FFG(X)’s lower estimated cost per thousand tons displacement?  To what degree will process improvements at F/MM, beyond those that were in place for building LCSs, permit FFG(X)s to be built at the Navy’s estimated cost per thousand tons?  How much might the cost of building FFG(X)s be reduced by converting the FFG(X) contract into a block buy contract (i.e., a multiyear contract)? 30 For additional discussion of the savings that are possible with MYP contracts, see CRS Report R41909, Multiyear Procurement (MYP) and Block Buy Contracting in Defense Acquisition: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 31 Some of the combat system equipment of a deployed LCS consists of a modular mission package is not permanently built into the ship. These modular mission packages are procured separately from the ship, and their procurement costs are not included in the unit procurement costs of LCSs. For additional discussion, see CRS Report RL33741, Navy Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 16 Regarding the Navy’s estimated cost for procuring FFG(X)s, an August 2019 Government Accountability Office (GAO) report on the FFG(X) program states: The Navy undertook a conceptual design phase for the FFG(X) Guided Missile Frigate program that enabled industry to inform FFG(X) requirements, identify opportunities for cost savings, and mature different ship designs. The Navy also streamlined the FFG(X) acquisition approach in an effort to accelerate the timeline for delivering the ships to the fleet…. [H]owever, the Navy has requested funding for the FFG(X) lead ship even though it has yet to complete key cost estimation activities, such as an independent cost estimate, to validate the credibility of cost expectations. Department of Defense (DOD) cost estimators told GAO the timeline for completing the independent cost estimate is uncertain. Specifically, they stated that this estimate will not be finalized until the Navy communicates to them which FFG(X) design is expected to receive the contract award. GAO-identified best practices call for requisite cost knowledge to be available to inform resource decisions and contract awards.32 An October 2019 Congressional Budget Office (CBO) report on the cost of the Navy’s shipbuilding programs stated the following about the FFG(X) (emphasis added): The four shipbuilders in the [FFG(X)] competition are using existing designs that have displacements of between 3,000 tons and almost 7,000 tons. The Navy’s cost goal for the program is currently set at $1.2 billion for the first ship of the class and an average cost of $800 million to $950 million for the remaining 19 ships. Because the 2020 shipbuilding plan estimates an average cost of slightly more than $850 million each for all 20 ships—an amount near the lower end of the Navy’s cost goal—actual costs would probably exceed the estimates. Historically, the costs of lead ships have grown by 27 percent, on average, over the Navy’s initial estimates…. Taking into account all publicly available information, CBO’s estimate reflects an assumption that the FFG(X) would displace about 4,700 tons, or the median point of the four proposed ship designs in competition for the program contract. As a result, CBO estimates the average cost of the FFG(X)s at $1.2 billion each, for a total cost of $23 billion, compared with the Navy’s estimate of $17 billion. Uncertainty about the frigate design makes that estimate difficult to determine.33 Number of FFG(X)s to Procure in FY2021 Another issue for Congress is whether to fund the procurement in FY2021 of one FFG(X) (the Navy’s request), no FFG(X), or two FFG(X)s. Supporters of procuring no FFG(X) in FY2021 could argue that traditionally there has often been a so-called gap year in Navy shipbuilding programs—a year of no procurement between the year that the lead ship is procured and the year that the second ship is procured. This gap year, they could argue, is intended to provide some time to discover through the ship’s construction process problems in the ship’s design that did not come to light during the design process, and fix those problems before they are built into one or more follow-on ships in the class. Given the Navy’s experience with its previous small surface combatant shipbuilding program—the Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) program—they could argue, inserting a gap year into the FFG(X)’s procurement profile would be prudent. 32 Government Accountability Office, Guide Missile Frigate[:] Navy Has Taken Steps to Reduce Acquisition Risk, but Opportunities Exist to Improve Knowledge for Decision Makers, GAO-19-512, August 2019, summary page. 33 Congressional Budget Office, An Analysis of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2020 Shipbuilding Plan, October 2019, pp. 252-26. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 17 Supporters of procuring one FFG(X) in FY2021 (rather than none) could argue that although including a gap year is a traditional practice in Navy shipbuilding programs, it has not always been used; that the era of computer-aided ship design (compared to the earlier era of paper designs) has reduced the need for gap years; that the need for a gap year in the FFG(X) program is further reduced by the program’s use of a parent design rather than a clean-sheet design; and that a gap year can increase the cost of the second and subsequent ships in the program by causing an interruption in the production learning curve and a consequent loss of learning at the shipyard and supplier firms in moving from production of the first ship to the second. Supporters of procuring one FFG(X) (rather than two) could argue that immediately moving from one ship in FY2020 to two ships in FY2021 could cause strains at the shipyard and thereby increase program risks, particularly given the challenges that shipyards have often encountered in building the first ship in a shipbuilding program, and that the funding needed for the procurement of a second FFG(X) in FY2021 could be better spent on other Navy program priorities. Supporters of procuring two FFG(X)s in FY2021 could argue that the Navy’s FY2020 shipbuilding plan (see Table 1) called for procuring two FFG(X)s in FY2021; that procuring one FFG(X) rather than two in FY2021 reduces production economies of scale in the FFG(X) program at the shipyard and supplier firms, thereby increasing unit procurement costs; and that procuring two FFG(X)s rather than one in FY2021 would help close more quickly the Navy’s large percentage shortfall in small surface combatants relative to the Navy’s force-level goal for such ships. Number of FFG(X) Builders Another issue for Congress is whether to build FFG(X)s at a single shipyard (the Navy’s baseline plan), or at two or three shipyards. The Navy’s FFG-7 class frigates, which were procured at annual rates of as high as eight ships per year, were built at three shipyards. In considering whether to build FFG(X)s at a single shipyard (the Navy’s baseline plan), or at two or three shipyards, Congress may consider several factors, including but not limited to the annual FFG(X) procurement rate, shipyard production capacities and production economies of scale, the potential costs and benefits in the FFG(X) program of employing recurring competition between multiple shipyards, and how the number of FFG(X) builders might fit into a larger situation involving the production of other Navy and Coast Guard ships, including Navy DDG-51 destroyers, Navy amphibious ships, Coast Guard National Security Cutters (NSCs), and Coast Guard Offshore Patrol Cutters (OPCs).34 U.S. Content Requirements Another issue for Congress is whether to take any further legislative action regarding U.S. content requirements for FFG(X)s. Potential options include amending, repealing, or replacing one or both of the two previously mentioned U.S. content provisions for the FFG(X) program that Congress passed in FY2020, passing a new, separate provision of some kind, or doing none of these things. 34 For more on the DDG-51 program, see CRS Report RL32109, Navy DDG-51 and DDG-1000 Destroyer Programs: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. For more on Navy amphibious shipbuilding programs, see CRS Report R43543, Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. For more on the NSC and OPC programs, see CRS Report R42567, Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 18 In considering whether to take any further legislative action on the issue, Congress may consider several factors, including the potential impacts of the two U.S. content provisions that Congress passed in FY2020. Some observers view these two provisions as being in tension with one another.35 In instances where differences between two enacted laws might need to be resolved, one traditional yardstick is to identify the legislation that was enacted later, on the grounds that it represents the final or most-recent word of the Congress on the issue. Although FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act and the FY2020 DOD Appropriations Act were signed into law on the same day (December 20, 2019), the P.L. numbers assigned to the two laws appear to indicate that the FY2020 DOD Appropriations Act was enacted later than the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act. It can also be noted that Section 8113(b) of the FY2020 DOD Appropriations Act is a provision relating to the use of FY2020 funds, while Section 856 of the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act refers to amounts authorized without reference to a specific fiscal year. Required Capabilities and Growth Margin Another issue for Congress is whether the Navy has appropriately defined the required capabilities and growth margin of the FFG(X). Analytical Basis for Desired Ship Capabilities One aspect of this issue is whether the Navy has an adequately rigorous analytical basis for its identification of the capability gaps or mission needs to be met by the FFG(X), and for its decision to meet those capability gaps or mission needs through the procurement of a FFG with the capabilities outlined earlier in this CRS report. The question of whether the Navy has an adequately rigorous analytical basis for these things was discussed in greater detail in earlier editions of this CRS report.36 Number of VLS Tubes Another potential aspect of this issue concerns the planned number of Vertical Launch System (VLS) missile tubes on the FFG(X). The VLS is the FFG(X)’s principal (though not only) means of storing and launching missiles. As shown in Figure 3 (see the box in the upper-left corner labeled “AW,” meaning air warfare), the FFG(X) is to be equipped with 32 Mark 41 VLS tubes. (The Mark 41 is the Navy’s standard VLS design.) Supporters of requiring the FFG(X) to be equipped with a larger number of VLS tubes, such as 48, might argue that the FFG(X) is to be roughly half as expensive to procure as the DDG-51 destroyer, and might therefore be more appropriately equipped with 48 VLS tubes, which is one-half the number on recent DDG-51s. They might also argue that in a context of renewed great power competition with potential adversaries such as China, which is steadily improving its naval capabilities,37 it might be prudent to equip the FFG(X)s with 48 rather than 32 VLS tubes, and that doing so might only marginally increase the unit procurement cost of the FFG(X). Supporters of requiring the FFG(X) to have no more than 32 VLS tubes might argue that the analyses indicating a need for 32 already took improving adversary capabilities (as well as other 35 See, for example, Ben Werner and Sam LaGrone, “FY 2020 Defense Measures Almost Law; Bills Contain Conflicting Language on FFG(X),” USNI News, December 20, 2019. 36 See, for example, the version of this report dated February 4, 2019. 37 For more on China’s naval modernization effort, see CRS Report RL33153, China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities—Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 19 U.S. Navy capabilities) into account. They might also argue that F/MM’s design for the FFG(X), in addition to having 32 VLS tubes, will also to have separate, deck-mounted box launchers for launching 16 anti-ship cruise missiles, as well as a separate, 21-cell Rolling Airframe Missile (RAM) AAW missile launcher; that the Navy plans to deploy additional VLS tubes on its planned Large Unmanned Surface Vehicles (LUSVs), which are to act as adjunct weapon magazines for the Navy’s manned surface combatants;38 and that increasing the number of VLS tubes on the FFG(X) from 32 to 48 would increase (even if only marginally) the procurement cost of a ship that is intended to be an affordable supplement to the Navy’s cruisers and destroyers. A May 14, 2019, Navy information paper on expanding the cost impact of expanding the FFG(X) VLS capacity from 32 cells to 48 cells states To grow from a 32 Cell VLS to a 48 Cell VLS necessitates an increase in the length of the ship with a small beam increase and roughly a 200-ton increase in full load displacement. This will require a resizing of the ship, readdressing stability and seakeeping analyses, and adapting ship services to accommodate the additional 16 VLS cells. A change of this nature would unnecessarily delay detail design by causing significant disruption to ship designs. Particularly the smaller ship designs. Potential competitors have already completed their Conceptual Designs and are entering the Detail Design and Construction competition with ship designs set to accommodate 32 cells. The cost is estimated to increase between $16M [million] and $24M [million] per ship. This includes ship impacts and additional VLS cells.39 Compared to an FFG(X) follow-on ship unit procurement cost of about $900 million, the above estimated increase of $16 million to $24 million would equate to an increase in unit procurement cost of about 1.8% to about 2.7%. Growth Margin Another potential aspect of this issue is whether the Navy more generally has chosen the appropriate amount of growth margin to incorporate into the FFG(X) design. As shown in the Appendix A, the Navy wants the FFG(X) design to have a growth margin (also called service life allowance) of 5%, meaning an ability to accommodate upgrades and other changes that might be made to the ship’s design over the course of its service life that could require up to 5% more space, weight, electrical power, or equipment cooling capacity. As shown in the Appendix A, the Navy also wants the FFG(X) design to have an additional growth margin (above the 5% factor) for accommodating a future directed energy system (i.e., a laser or high-power microwave device) or an active electronic attack system (i.e., electronic warfare system). Supporters could argue that a 5% growth margin is traditional for a ship like a frigate, that the FFG(X)’s 5% growth margin is supplemented by the additional growth margin for a directed energy system or active electronic attack system, and that requiring a larger growth margin could make the FFG(X) design larger and more expensive to procure. Skeptics might argue that a larger growth margin (such as 10%—a figure used in designing cruisers and destroyers) would provide more of a hedge against the possibility of greater-than-anticipated improvements in the capabilities of potential adversaries such as China, that a limited 38 For additional discussion, see CRS Report R45757, Navy Large Unmanned Surface and Undersea Vehicles: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 39 Navy information paper entitled “FFG(X) Cost to Grow to 48 cell VLS,” dated May 14, 2019, received from Navy Office of Legislative Affairs on June 14, 2019. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 20 growth margin was a concern in the FFG-7 design,40 and that increasing the FFG(X) growth margin from 5% to 10% would have only a limited impact on the FFG(X)’s procurement cost. A potential oversight question for Congress might be: What would be the estimated increase in unit procurement cost of the FFG(X) of increasing the ship’s growth margin from 5% to 10%? Technical Risk Another potential oversight issue for Congress concerns technical risk in the FFG(X) program. The Navy can argue that the program’s technical risk has been reduced by use of the parent-design approach and the decision to use only systems and technologies that already exist or are already being developed for use in other programs, rather than new technologies that need to be developed. Skeptics, while acknowledging that point, might argue that lead ships in Navy shipbuilding programs inherently pose technical risk, because they serve as the prototypes for their programs. May 2019 GAO Report A May 2019 GAO report on the status of various Department of Defense (DOD) acquisition programs states the following about the FFG(X) program: Current Status The FFG(X) program continues conceptual design work ahead of planned award of a lead ship detail design and construction contract in September 2020. In May 2017, the Navy revised its plans for a new frigate derived from minor modifications of an LCS design. The current plan is to select a design and shipbuilder through full and open competition to provide a more lethal and survivable small surface combatant. As stated in the FFG(X) acquisition strategy, the Navy awarded conceptual design contracts in February 2018 for development of five designs based on ships already demonstrated at sea. The tailoring plan indicates the program will minimize technology development by relying on government-furnished equipment from other programs or known-contractor-furnished equipment. In November 2018, the program received approval to tailor its acquisition documentation to support development start in February 2020. This included waivers for several requirements, such as an analysis of alternatives and an affordability analysis for the total program life cycle. FFG(X) also received approval to tailor reviews to validate system specifications and the release of the request for proposals for the detail design and construction contract…. Program Office Comments We provided a draft of this assessment to the program office for review and comment. The program office did not have any comments.41 40 See, for example, See U.S. General Accounting Office, Statement of Jerome H. Stolarow, Director, Procurement and Systems Acquisition Division, before the Subcommittee on Priorities and Economy in Government, Joint Economic Committee on The Navy’s FFG-7 Class Frigate Shipbuilding Program, and Other Ship Program Issues, January 3, 1979, pp. 9-11. 41 Government Accountability Office, Weapon Systems Annual Assessment[:] Limited Use of Knowledge-Based Practices Continues to Undercut DOD’s Investments, GAO-19-336SP, p. 132. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 21 Guaranty vs. Warranty in Construction Contract Another aspect of this issue concerns the Navy’s use of a guaranty rather than a warranty in the Detail Design and Construction (DD&C) contract for the FFG(X) program. An August 2019 GAO report on the FFG(X) program states The Navy plans to use a fixed-price incentive contract for FFG(X) detail design and construction. This is a notable departure from prior Navy surface combatant programs that used higher-risk cost-reimbursement contracts for lead ship construction. The Navy also plans to require that each ship has a minimum guaranty of $5 million to correct shipbuilder-responsible defects identified in the 18 months following ship delivery. However, Navy officials discounted the potential use of a warranty—another mechanism to address the correction of shipbuilder defects—stating that their use could negatively affect shipbuilding cost and reduce competition for the contract award. The Navy provided no analysis to support these claims and has not demonstrated why the use of warranties is not a viable option. The Navy’s planned use of guarantees helps ensure the FFG(X) shipbuilder is responsible for correcting defects up to a point, but guarantees generally do not provide the same level of coverage as warranties. GAO found in March 2016 that the use of a guaranty did not help improve cost or quality outcomes for the ships reviewed. GAO also found the use of a warranty in commercial shipbuilding and certain Coast Guard ships improves cost and quality outcomes by requiring the shipbuilders to pay to repair defects. The FFG(X) request for proposal offers the Navy an opportunity to solicit pricing for a warranty to assess the cost-effectiveness of the different mechanisms to address ship defects.42 As discussed in another CRS report,43 in discussions of Navy (and also Coast Guard) shipbuilding, a question that sometimes arises is whether including a warranty in a shipbuilding contract is preferable to not including one. The question can arise, for example, in connection with a GAO finding that “the Navy structures shipbuilding contracts so that it pays shipbuilders to build ships as part of the construction process and then pays the same shipbuilders a second time to repair the ship when construction defects are discovered.”44 Including a warranty in a shipbuilding contract (or a contract for building some other kind of defense end item), while potentially valuable, might not always be preferable to not including one—it depends on the circumstances of the acquisition, and it is not necessarily a valid criticism of an acquisition program to state that it is using a contract that does not include a warranty (or a weaker form of a warranty rather than a stronger one). Including a warranty generally shifts to the contractor the risk of having to pay for fixing problems with earlier work. Although that in itself could be deemed desirable from the government’s standpoint, a contractor negotiating a contract that will have a warranty will incorporate that risk into its price, and depending on how much the contractor might charge for doing that, it is possible that the government could wind up paying more in total for acquiring the item (including fixing problems with earlier work on that item) than it would have under a contract without a warranty. 42 Government Accountability Office, Guide Missile Frigate[:] Navy Has Taken Steps to Reduce Acquisition Risk, but Opportunities Exist to Improve Knowledge for Decision Makers, GAO-19-512, August 2019, summary page. 43 See CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 44 See Government Accountability Office, Navy Shipbuilding[:] Past Performance Provides Valuable Lessons for Future Investments, GAO-18-238SP, June 2018, p. 21. A graphic on page 21 shows a GAO finding that the government was financially responsible for shipbuilder deficiencies in 96% of the cases examined by GAO, and that the shipbuilder was financially responsible for shipbuilder deficiencies in 4% of the cases. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 22 When a warranty is not included in the contract and the government pays later on to fix problems with earlier work, those payments can be very visible, which can invite critical comments from observers. But that does not mean that including a warranty in the contract somehow frees the government from paying to fix problems with earlier work. In a contract that includes a warranty, the government will indeed pay something to fix problems with earlier work—but it will make the payment in the less-visible (but still very real) form of the up-front charge for including the warranty, and that charge might be more than what it would have cost the government, under a contract without a warranty, to pay later on for fixing those problems. From a cost standpoint, including a warranty in the contract might or might not be preferable, depending on the risk that there will be problems with earlier work that need fixing, the potential cost of fixing such problems, and the cost of including the warranty in the contract. The point is that the goal of avoiding highly visible payments for fixing problems with earlier work and the goal of minimizing the cost to the government of fixing problems with earlier work are separate and different goals, and that pursuing the first goal can sometimes work against achieving the second goal.45 DOD’s guide on the use of warranties states the following: Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) 46.7 states that “the use of warranties is not mandatory.” However, if the benefits to be derived from the warranty are commensurate with the cost of the warranty, the CO [contracting officer] should consider placing it in the contract. In determining whether a warranty is appropriate for a specific acquisition, FAR Subpart 46.703 requires the CO to consider the nature and use of the supplies and services, the cost, the administration and enforcement, trade practices, and reduced requirements. The rationale for using a warranty should be documented in the contract file.... In determining the value of a warranty, a CBA [cost-benefit analysis] is used to measure the life cycle costs of the system with and without the warranty. A CBA is required to determine if the warranty will be cost beneficial. CBA is an economic analysis, which basically compares the Life Cycle Costs (LCC) of the system with and without the warranty to determine if warranty coverage will improve the LCCs. In general, five key factors will drive the results of the CBA: cost of the warranty + cost of warranty administration + compatibility with total program efforts + cost of overlap with Contractor support + intangible savings. Effective warranties integrate reliability, maintainability, supportability, availability, and life-cycle costs. Decision factors that must be evaluated include the state of the weapon system technology, the size of the warranted population, the likelihood that field performance requirements can be achieved, and the warranty period of performance.46 In response to a draft version of GAO’s August 2019 report, the Navy stated As a part of the planning for the procurement of detail design and construction for FFG(X), the Navy determined that a guaranty, rather than a commercial-type warranty, will be 45 It can also be noted that the country’s two largest builders of Navy ships—General Dynamics (GD) and Huntington Ingalls Industries (HII)—derive about 60% and 96%, respectively, of their revenues from U.S. government work. (See General Dynamics, 2016 Annual Report, page 9 of Form 10-K [PDF page 15 of 88]) and Huntington Ingalls Industries, 2016 Annual Report, page 5 of Form 10-K [PDF page 19 of 134]). These two shipbuilders operate the only U.S. shipyards currently capable of building several major types of Navy ships, including submarines, aircraft carriers, large surface combatants, and amphibious ships. Thus, even if a warranty in a shipbuilding contract with one of these firms were to somehow mean that the government did not have pay under the terms of that contract—either up front or later on—for fixing problems with earlier work done under that contract, there would still be a question as to whether the government would nevertheless wind up eventually paying much of that cost as part of the price of one or more future contracts the government may have that firm. 46 Department of Defense, Department of Defense Warranty Guide, Version 1.0, September 2009, accessed July 13, 2017, at https://www.acq.osd.mil/dpap/pdi/uid/docs/departmentofdefensewarrantyguide[1].doc. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 23 implemented for the program. As a part of the FFG(X) detail design and construction request for proposals [RFP] released on June 20, 2019, the Navy asked contractors to include a limit of liability of at least $5 million per ship and a guaranty period of 18 months beyond preliminary acceptance of each ship. Further, the solicitation allows offerors to propose as additional limit of liability amount beyond the required $5 million amount, up to and including an unlimited liability. This arrangement represents an appropriate balance between price considerations and risks, ensuring that the shipbuilder is accountable for the correction of defects that follow preliminary acceptance, while allowing each shipbuilder to use its own business judgement in proposing the value of the limit of liability. The Navy released the solicitation prior to this GAO recommendation and is unable to modify the current solicitation because it would cause an unacceptable delay to the FFG(X) program. To support the GAO recommendation to request pricing for an unlimited warranty, the Navy will request pricing for unlimited warranty before exercising the first ship option and evaluate the business case.47 Potential Industrial-Base Impacts of FFG(X) Program Another issue for Congress concerns the potential industrial-base impacts of the FFG(X) program for shipyards and supplier firms in the context of other Navy and Coast Guard shipbuilding programs, including the Navy’s Littoral Combat Ship (LCS), DDG-51 destroyer, and amphibious shipbuilding programs, and the Coast Guard’s National Security Cutter (NSC) and Offshore Patrol Cutter (OPC) programs. Two of the teams that competed for the FFG(X) program involved shipyards (F/MM and Austal USA) that are currently building LCSs, procurement of which ended in FY2019. With the FFG(X) contract having been awarded to F/MM, Austal USA and its associated supplier firms could face a downturn in workloads and employment levels as they work off their backlog of LCS-related work if this work is not replaced by work associated with building other Navy or Coast Guard ships. The two other teams that competed for the FFG(X) program involved shipyards (GD/BIW and HII/Ingalls) that currently build DDG-51 destroyers and (in the case of HII/Ingalls) Navy amphibious ships. As discussed in the CRS report on the DDG-51 program, the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission shows a programmed reduction in the DDG-51 procurement rate starting in FY2023, perhaps as a reflection of a potential change in the surface combatant force architecture.48 A potential change in the Navy’s amphibious ship force architecture might impact the types and quantities of amphibious ships being procured for the Navy.49 Other things held equal, these two shipyards and their associated supplier firms could face a downturn in workloads and employment levels if the level of DDG-51-related work and (for HII/Ingalls) amphibious-ship-related work is reduced and not replaced by work associated with building other Navy or Coast Guard ships. 47 Government Accountability Office, Guide Missile Frigate[:] Navy Has Taken Steps to Reduce Acquisition Risk, but Opportunities Exist to Improve Knowledge for Decision Makers, GAO-19-512, August 2019 (revised September 5, 2019 to include an omitted page in the report section, [and] comments from the Department of Defense), pp. 44-45. 48 See CRS Report RL32109, Navy DDG-51 and DDG-1000 Destroyer Programs: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 49 See CRS Report R43543, Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 24 Legislative Activity for FY2021 Summary of Congressional Action on FY2021 Funding Request Table 4 summarizes congressional action on the Navy’s FY2021 funding request for the LCS program. Table 4. Congressional Action on FY2021 Procurement Funding Request Millions of dollars, rounded to nearest tenth. Authorization Appropriation Request HASC SASC Conf. HAC SAC Conf. Funding 1,053.1 (Procurement quantity) (1) Source: Table prepared by CRS based on FY2021 Navy budget submission, committee and conference reports, and explanatory statements on the FY2021 National Defense Authorization Act and the FY2021 DOD Appropriations Act. Notes: HASC is House Armed Services Committee; SASC is Senate Armed Services Committee; HAC is House Appropriations Committee; SAC is Senate Appropriations Committee; Conf. is conference agreement. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 25 Appendix A. Navy Briefing Slides from July 25, 2017, FFG(X) Industry Day Event This appendix reprints some of the briefing slides that the Navy presented at its July 25, 2017, industry day event on the FFG(X) program, which was held in association with the Request for Information (RFI) that the Navy issued on July 25, 2017, to solicit information for better understanding potential trade-offs between cost and capability in the FFG(X) design. The reprinted slides begin on the next page. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 26 Slides from Navy FFG(X) Industry Day Briefing Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 27 Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 28 Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 29 Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 30 Source: Slides from briefing posted on July 28, 2017, at RFI: FFG(X) - US Navy Guided Missile Frigate Replacement Program, https://www.fbo.gov/index?s=opportunity&mode=form&tab=core&id=d089cf61f254538605cdec5438955b8e&_cview=0, accessed August 11, 2017. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 31 Appendix B. Competing Industry Teams This appendix presents additional background information on the industry teams competing for the FFG(X) program. February 16, 2018, Press Report About Five Competing Industry Teams A February 16, 2018, press report about the five competing industry teams reportedly competing for the FFG(X) program (i.e., the five industry teams shown in Table 2) stated the following: The Navy would not confirm how many groups bid for the [FFG(X)] work. At least one U.S.-German team that was not selected for a [conceptual] design contract, Atlas USA and ThyssenKrupp Marine Systems, told USNI News they had submitted for the [DD&C] competition.... During last month’s Surface Navy Association [annual symposium], several shipbuilders outlined their designs for the FFG(X) competition. Austal USA Shipyard: Austal USA in Mobile, Ala. Parent Design: Independence-class [i.e., LCS-2 class] Littoral Combat Ship One of the two Littoral Combat Ship builders, Austal USA has pitched an upgunned variant of the Independence-class LCS as both a foreign military sales offering and as the answer to the Navy’s upgunned small surface combatant and then frigate programs. Based on the 3,000-ton aluminum trimaran design, the hull boasts a large flight deck and space for up to 16 Mk-41 Vertical Launching System (VLS) cells. Fincantieri Marine Group Shipyard: Fincantieri Marinette Marine in Marinette, Wisc. Parent Design: Fincantieri Italian FREMM As part of the stipulations of the FFG(X) programs, a contractor can offer just one design in the competition as a prime contractor but may also support a second bid as a subcontractor. Fincantieri elected to offer its 6,700-ton Italian Fregata europea multi-missione (FREMM) design for construction in its Wisconsin Marinette Marine shipyard, as well as partner with Lockheed Martin on its Freedom-class pitch as a subcontractor. The Italian FREMM design features a 16-cell VLS as well as space for deck-launched anti-ship missiles. General Dynamics Bath Iron Works Shipyard: Bath Iron Works in Bath, Maine Parent Design: Navantia Álvaro de Bazán-class F100 Frigate The 6,000-ton air defense guided-missile frigates fitted with the Aegis Combat System have been in service for the Spanish Armada since 2002 and are the basis of the Australian Hobart-class air defense destroyers and the Norwegian Fridtjof Nansen-class frigates. The Navantia partnership with Bath is built on a previous partnership from the turn of the century. The F100 frigates were a product of a teaming agreement between BIW, Lockheed Martin and Navantia predecessor Izar as part of the Advanced Frigate Consortium from 2000. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 32 Huntington Ingalls Industries Shipyard: Ingalls Shipbuilding in Pascagoula, Miss. Parent Design: Unknown Out of the competitors involved in the competition, HII was the only company that did not present a model or a rendering of its FFG(X) at the Surface Navy Association symposium in January. A spokeswoman for the company declined to elaborate on the offering when contacted by USNI News on Friday. In the past, HII has presented a naval version of its Legend-class National Security Cutter design as a model at trade shows labeled as a “Patrol Frigate.” Lockheed Martin Shipyard: Fincantieri Marinette Marine in Marinette, Wisc. Parent Design: Freedom-class [i.e., LCS-1 class] Littoral Combat Ship Of the two LCS builders, Lockheed Martin is the first to have secured a foreign military sale with its design. The company’s FFG(X) bid will have much in common with its offering for the Royal Saudi Navy’s 4,000-ton multi-mission surface combatant. The new Saudi ships will be built around an eight-cell Mk-41 vertical launch system and a 4D air search radar. Lockheed has pitched several other variants of the hull that include more VLS cells. “We are proud of our 15-year partnership with the U.S. Navy on the Freedom-variant Littoral Combat Ship and look forward to extending it to FFG(X),” said Joe DePietro, Lockheed Martin vice president of small combatants and ship systems in a Friday evening statement. “Our frigate design offers an affordable, low-risk answer to meeting the Navy’s goals of a larger and more capable fleet.”50 May 28, 2019, Press Report About One Industry Team Deciding to Not Submit a Bid On May 28, 2019, it was reported that one of the five industry teams that had been interested in the FFG(X) program had informed the Navy on May 23 that it had decided to not submit a bid for the program. The May 28, 2019, press report about this industry team’s decision stated: Lockheed Martin won’t submit a bid to compete in the design of the Navy’s next-generation guided-missile (FFG(X)) frigate competition, company officials told USNI News on Tuesday [May 28]. The company elected to focus on its involvement developing the frigate combat system and other systems rather than forward its Freedom-class LCS design for the detailed design and construction contract Naval Sea Systems Command plans to issue this summer, Joe DePietro, Lockheed Martin vice president of small combatants and ship systems, told USNI News. “We reviewed the entire program and obviously, given some of the stuff that has already happened that is outside of the contract for the program—that includes the designation of our combat management system, COMBATSS 21, derived off of Aegis; we have the 50 Sam LaGrone and Megan Eckstein, “Navy Picks Five Contenders for Next Generation Frigate FFG(X) Program,” USNI News, February 16, 2018. See also David B. Larter, “Navy Awards Design Contracts for Future Frigate,” Defense News, February 16, 2018; Lee Hudson, “Navy Awards Five Conceptual Design Contracts for Future Frigate Competition,” Inside the Navy, February 19, 2018. Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service R44972 · VERSION 56 · UPDATED 33 Mk-41 vertical launch system; the processing for our anti-submarine warfare area; advanced [electronic warfare] and platform integration,” he said. “As we evaluated all of those different areas, we determined not to pursue, as a prime contractor, the FFG(X) detailed design and construction.” The company informed the Navy on May 23 it would not join the other bidders for the hull design, two sources familiar with the notification told USNI News. While the design passed two Navy reviews, the company told the service it felt the Freedom design would be stretched too far to accommodate all the capabilities required, one source told USNI News…. While Lockheed is moving away from leading a frigate team, the company will be heavily involved with whoever wins. The FFG(X)’s COMBATSS-21 Combat Management System will be derived from the company’s Aegis Combat System, and Lockheed Martin makes the ship’s vertical launch system.51 Author Information Ronald O'Rourke Specialist in Naval Affairs Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 51 Sam LaGrone, “Lockheed Martin Won’t Submit Freedom LCS Design for FFG(X) Contest,” USNI News, May 28, 2019. 		2020-05-06T13:57:47-0400
Air Force F-15EX Fighter Program https://crsreports.congress.gov April 28, 2020Air Force F-15EX Fighter ProgramIn FY2020, the Trump Administration proposed to buy eight F-15EX aircraft for $1.1 billion, the first installment toward a planned initial buy of 144 planes. Subsequently, Congress authorized $985.5 million and appropriated $1.05 billion for the program. The Administration’s FY2021 budget requests $1.27 billion for 12 more F-15EXs; the plan set forth in FY2020 had called for 18 in FY2021. This acquisition represents a change from previous Air Force plans to procure only stealthy “fifth-generation” fighter aircraft. What is an F-15EX, and why might the Air Force have changed plans? What is an F-15EX? The Air Force received its first F-15 Eagle air superiority fighter in 1974. Subsequently, the F-15 evolved to encompass more roles, most notably with the deployment of the F-15E Strike Eagle in 1989. The F-15E added substantial air-to-ground capability, including a second cockpit for a weapons systems operator. The Air Force has 453 F-15s of all variants, the last of which was ordered in 2001. Since then, F-15s have been continuously produced for a variety of international customers, including (among others) Israel, Saudi Arabia, and Japan. Figure 1. F-15EX Concept Source: Boeing. Current F-15s have stronger airframes and more advanced sensors, processors, and flight control systems than those in the U.S. fleet. Many also include conformal fuel tanks to extend range and increase payload. The proposed F-15EX would be based on the most advanced Eagles, currently entering production for Qatar, which first flew on April 14, 2020. F-15EXs would add radar and other subsystems unique to the United States. Boeing says that the F-15EX would have 70% parts commonality with existing U.S. F-15s. Why is the Air Force requesting F-15EXs? Air Force officials have offered numerous justifications for the F-15EX:  The Air Force is engaged in upgrades to its existing F-15 fleet. While costing more per aircraft than modernizing legacy F-15s, a new F-15EX would yield more future life. Replacing the older, 1980s-era F-15Cs with F-15EX could also enable the Air Force to avoid the cost of some or all of those upgrades. “The Air Force has tried to retire its 250 aging F-15Cs and two-seat F-15Ds over the years due to structural issues with the aircraft, including most recently in 2017. Now, instead of paying to upgrade the older aircraft in the fleet, the Air Force hopes to use that money to buy Boeing’s F-15EX.”  Buying F-15s, according to the Air Force, is an economical way of reaching the service’s goals for fighter fleet size and average age. “Gen. James ‘Mike’ Holmes, head of Air Combat Command, told reporters in February that purchasing the F-15EX could be the ‘affordable answer’ to meeting the Air Force’s goal of acquiring 72 new fighter jets each year.”  F-15s could also cost less to operate over time than fifth-generation fighters like the F-35. (The per-hour cost of F-15s is fairly well established, while there is less real-world experience with the F-35 fleet; a direct comparison is difficult.)  Because the Air Force already operates F-15s, transition to the F-15EX could be comparatively easy. “We made the determination to buy F-15EXs so that we could keep our readiness at a higher level and meet the capacity need that we had for those fourth generation platforms. That is important from a readiness perspective because the time to transition from an F-15C to an F-15EX we estimate at 3 to 6 months, while the time to transition from an F-15C to an F-35 could be anywhere from 18 to 36 months and would require MILCON and other attributes that are not in our budget.”  F-15EX procurement helps maintain a competitive fighter aircraft industrial base. Currently, Boeing and Lockheed Martin are the prime contractors supplying fighter jets to the Department of Defense. A National Defense magazine report stated After the decision was made to continue with a mix of fourth- and fifth-generation aircraft, “the conversation then turned to how are we Air Force F-15EX Fighter Program https://crsreports.congress.gov going to maintain a robust industrial base,” a Pentagon official, who declined to be named, official told reporters. “For the future of the Department of Defense, it’s going to be good to have multiple providers in the tactical aircraft portfolio … and that’s what led our way into the F-15EX decision,” he added. Former Air Force Secretary Heather Wilson said that the Air Force did not request the F-15EXs in its initial FY2020 budget submission. This proposal appears to have been added by the Office of the Secretary of Defense during the budget build process, without a request for proposals or explanation. However, Wilson and other Air Force officials subsequently advocated for the F-15EX. “‘We are seeing a decline in the number of fighters available, the increase in the average age of those fighters, and if we look at the whole system and the whole capacity over the next 10 to 20 years, one of the airframes that is not going to make it is the F-15C,’ Wilson said.” “We need to replace those F-15Cs with something.” Gen. Arnold Bunch added, “We have now looked at … what it takes to modernize that capability up in an F-15C, and the determination we made was that was not what we needed to do.” Does the F-15EX replace the F-35? The Air Force has been at pains to emphasize that the F-35 and F-15EX are not rivals, but complementary. The F-35 brings superior stealth and sensor fusion; the F-15 can carry more payload. (Air Force officials describe this as the difference between “capability” and “capacity.”) The message of different missions can also be seen in the emphasis on F-15EX as an alternative to modernizing existing F-15s in their existing roles. Given a fixed Air Force budget topline, however, increases in one program require cuts in others. According to Air Force Chief of Staff General David Goldfein, “If we had the money, those would be 72 F-35s. But we’ve gotta look at this from a cost/business case.” He also noted, “We are absolutely adamant that the F-35 program, the program of record, absolutely stays on track and we don't take a dime out of the F-35.” While maintaining the planned purchase of 48 F-35As in FY2020, the Administration reduced its projected buy by 18 aircraft through FY2023 in its FY2020 and FY2021 budget submissions. This may not be a direct correlation, but has led some to see a tension between the two programs. Although the F-15EX acquisition was proposed as a sole-source contract outside of the normal requirements-definition process, Congress acted to retroactively require much of the same documentation. The FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act and the explanatory statement accompanying the FY2020 Defense Appropriations Act require the Secretary of the Air Force to provide an F-15EX acquisition strategy, cost and schedule estimates, and strategies for test and evaluation, logistics, and post-production fielding. The appropriations statement also requires a capability production document and life-cycle sustainment plan. Possible Questions  Should acquisition of new fighters be a competitive procurement?  What are the relative costs of upgrade and modernizing existing F-15s as opposed to buying new ones? How many flight hours does the Air Force expect to get from the jets in each case?  If new F-15EXs are purchased, would the Air Force retire older F-15s rather than upgrading them? How many upgrades would be foregone for each new F-15 purchased?  How does the replacement of F-15s fit with the Air Force’s declared goal of growing to 386 squadrons?  If stealthy aircraft are only required in a given conflict until the air defenses are taken down, which allows older-technology aircraft to operate with impunity, does it make sense to size the buy of fifth-generation aircraft using requirements for the early phases of conflict?  What is DOD’s commitment to completing the planned buy of F-35As?  How does the F-15EX fit with the current National Military Strategy emphasizing capability against sophisticated adversaries? Jeremiah Gertler, Specialist in Military Aviation IF11521 Air Force F-15EX Fighter Program https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF11521 · VERSION 2 · NEW Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. https://crsreports.congress.gov/		2020-04-29T14:27:39-0400
The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Updated May 1, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov R44452 The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Summary The Military Selective Service Act (MSSA), first enacted as the Selective Service Act of 1948, provides the statutory authority for the federal government to maintain a Selective Service System (SSS) as an independent federal agency responsible for delivering appropriately qualified civilian men for induction into the Armed Forces of the United States as authorized by Congress. The annual budget for the agency is about $26 million. One of the SSS’s main functions is to maintain a database of registrants in case of a draft. The agency stores approximately 78 million records in order to verify registration status and eligibility for certain benefits that require certification of registration for eligibility. The SSS has a staff of about 124 full-time employees, complemented by a corps of volunteers and military reservists. The MSSA requires most males between the ages of 18 and 26 who are citizens or residents of the United States to register with Selective Service. Women in the United States have never been required to register for the draft. Men who fail to register may be subject to criminal penalties, loss of eligibility for certain federal or state employment opportunities and education benefits, and denial of security clearances. Documented or undocumented immigrants who fail to register may not be able to obtain United States citizenship. While individuals may still register at U.S. post offices, the SSS attributes high compliance rates to a system of automatic electronic registration supported by state legislation and interagency cooperation. The MSSA does not currently authorize the use of a draft for induction into the Armed Forces. When the draft has been implemented, it has met some public resistance. Such resistance to the draft drives much of the opposition toward maintaining the SSS and the registration requirement. Even some who are not opposed to the government’s use of conscription in a time of national need are opposed to maintaining the current SSS agency infrastructure. They argue that a stand-alone agency is unnecessary and expensive and that there are a number of alternatives that could more effectively and efficiently enable the country to reestablish conscription, if necessary. Others counter that, at the cost of about $26 million annually, maintaining the SSS is a relatively inexpensive insurance policy should the draft need to be quickly reinstated. They also argue that maintaining the SSS sends a signal to potential adversaries that the United States is willing to draw on its full national resources for armed conflict if necessary. Some are concerned that the registration requirements are inequitable, arguing that it is unfair to men that women can voluntarily serve in all military occupations but are exempt from the registration requirement and the prospect of being drafted. In addition, some have raised concerns about the statutory penalties for failing to register and whether these penalties are more likely to be levied on economically or educationally disadvantaged groups. Some contend that Congress should amend MSSA and associated statute to remove penalties for failing to register. Others argue that weakening or removing penalties would cause registration compliance rates to fall to unacceptably low levels. In response to these issues, Congress established a National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service to provide research support and recommendations for the future of the SSS. The Commission released its final report in March 2020 and recommended maintaining the SSS and mandatory registration as a draft contingency mechanism. The commission also recommended expanding mandatory registration for women. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Contents Overview ....................................................................................................................... 1 Background.................................................................................................................... 1 1863 Enrollment Act and Civil War Conscription ........................................................... 2 Selective Service Act of 1917 and World War I Conscription ............................................ 3 The Selective Training and Service Act and World War II ................................................ 4 Consideration of Universal Compulsory Service ....................................................... 7 Post-World War II, the Selective Service Act of 1948 ...................................................... 7 Korean War and the Universal Military Training and Service Act of 1951 .......................... 8 The Vietnam War and Proposals for Draft Reform ........................................................ 10 The Gates Commission ....................................................................................... 12 All-Volunteer Force (AVF) and a Standby SSS ............................................................. 14 New Penalties for Registration Noncompliance ............................................................ 16 Other Legislative Proposals since 1980 ....................................................................... 18 National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service...................................... 18 Selective Service Registration ......................................................................................... 21 Processes for Registration ......................................................................................... 22 Selective Service System Agency Overview ...................................................................... 25 Workforce and Organization ...................................................................................... 26 Funding ................................................................................................................. 27 Data-Sharing and Data Management........................................................................... 27 What are Some Options for the Future of the Selective Service System? ................................ 28 Arguments For and Against Repeal of MSSA .............................................................. 29 Other Legislative Options and Considerations .............................................................. 30 Repealing the Peacetime Registration Requirement ................................................. 30 Transferring SSS Functions to an Existing Federal Agency ....................................... 31 Amending or Repealing the Penalties for Failing to Register ..................................... 32 Changing Registration Requirements to Include Women........................................... 33 Enhanced SSS Data Collection for the Acquisition of Critical Skills ........................... 36 Strengthening Ability to Respond to a National Mobilization .................................... 38 Figures Figure 1. Registrations by Method of Registration.............................................................. 23 Tables Table 1. Draft Inductees and Total Participants in Major Conflicts ........................................ 13 Table 2. Who Is Required to Register for the Selective Service? ........................................... 21 Table 3. Selective Service Agency Budget......................................................................... 27 Table A-1. Acronyms ..................................................................................................... 39 The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Appendixes Appendix. Acronyms ..................................................................................................... 39 Contacts Author Information ....................................................................................................... 39 The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 1 Overview The United States has not used conscription to fill manpower requirements for over four dec ades; however, the Selective Service System and the requirement for young men to register for the draft remain today. Men who fail to register are subject to penalties in the form of lost benefits and criminal action. Some have questioned the need to maintain this agency and the registration requirements. Others have questioned whether the current requirements for registration are fair and equitable. This report provides Congress with information about how the Military Selective Service Act (MSSA), the Selective Service System (SSS), and associated requirements for registration have evolved over time. It explains why the United States developed the SSS, what the system looks like today, how constituents are affected by the MSSA requirements, and what the options and considerations may be for the future of the Selective Service. The first section of the report provides background and history on the Military Selective Service Act, the Selective Service System, and the implementation of the draft in the United States. The second section discusses statutory registration requirements, processes for registering, and penalties for failing to register. The third section discusses the current organization, roles, and resourcing of the Selective Service System. The final section discusses policy options and consideration for Congress for the future of the MSSA and the Selective Service System. This report does not discuss the state of the all-volunteer force or whether it is adequate to meet the nation’s current or future manpower needs. In addition, it does not provide an analysis of other options for military manpower resourcing such as universal military service or universal military training. Finally, this report does not evaluate whether the SSS, as currently structured, is adequately resourced and organized to perform its statutory mission. These questions and others were reviewed by the National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service established by the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for Fiscal Year 2017 (P.L. 114-328). The Commission released its final report on March 26, 2020 and a brief discussion of its findings with relation to the SSS are included in this report. Background The United States has used federal conscription at various times since the Civil War era, primarily in times of war, but also during peacetime in the aftermath of World War II. When first adopted in 1863, national conscription was a marked departure from the traditional military policy of the United States, which from the founding era had relied on a small volunteer force that could be augmented by state militias in times of conflict. Conscription was used as a mechanism to provide military manpower during times of need until the adoption of the all-volunteer force (AVF) in 1973. At this time, authority to induct new draftees under the Military Selective Service Act ceased.1 Nevertheless, a standby draft mechanism still exists to furnish manpower above and beyond that provided by the active and reserve components of the Armed Forces in the case of a major military contingency. If the federal government were to reinstate the draft, draftees would likely be required to fill all authorized positions to include casualty replacements, billets in understrength units, and new military units activated to expand the wartime force. 1 P.L. 92-129. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 2 1863 Enrollment Act and Civil War Conscription During the Civil War, due to high demand for military manpower, weaknesses in the system for calling up state militia units, and an insufficient number of volunteers for active federal service, President Abraham Lincoln signed the 1863 Enrollment Act.2 This marked the first instance of the federal government calling individuals into compulsory federal service through conscription.3 All male citizens between the ages of 20 and 45 who were capable of bearing arms were liable to be drafted. The law allowed exemptions for dependency and employment in official positions. The Enrollment Act also established a national Provost Marshal Bureau, led by a provost marshal general and was responsible for enforcing the draft.4 Under the act, the President had authority to establish enrollment districts and to appoint a provost marshal to each district to serve under the direction of the Secretary of War in a separate bureau under the War Department. The provost marshal general was responsible for establishing a district board for processing enrollments and was given authority under the law to make rules and regulations for the operation of the boards and to arrest draft dodgers and deserters. Government agents went door-to-door to enroll individuals, followed by a lottery in each congressional district based on district quotas.5 Some observers criticized the Enrollment Act as favoring the wealthiest citizens, because it allowed for either the purchase of a substitute who would serve in the draftee’s place or payment by the draftee of a fee up to $300.6 In addition, volunteers were offered bounties by both the federal government and some local communities. Under this system, fraud and desertions were common.7 Enforcement of the draft also incited rioting and violence in many cities across the United States, most famously in New York City. On July 13, 1863, the intended date of the second draft drawing in New York City, an angry mob attacked the assistant Ninth District provost marshal’s office, smashing the lottery selection wheel and setting the building on fire.8 Several days of rioting and violence ensued until federal troops were called in to restore order. The draft call was suspended in New York City during the rioting and was not resumed until August 19, 1863. The total number of men that served in the Union forces during the course of the war was 2,690,401. The number drafted was 255,373. Of the total draftees, 86,724 avoided military 2 12 Stat. 731. This act is also known as the Civil War Military Draft Act or the National Conscription Law. 3 The federal government had called state militias into compulsory service. Conscription differs from militia activations in that the federal government calls individuals directly into federal service without going through the states. 4 The provost marshal general was an Army appointment first used in the American Revolutionary War, and thereafter, mainly during periods of war. Currently, the provost marshal general serves in a law enforcement -type role for the U.S. Army. See https://www.army.mil/opmg. 5 Quotas were based on the number of eligible men, not the total population, and also took into account the number of men already serving in the district. All registered men had their names entered into their local district lottery and were required to report in the order that their names were drawn. 6 “That any person drafted and notified to appear as aforesaid, may [ ... ] furnish an acceptable substitute to take his place in the draft, or he may pay [ ... ] such sum, not exceeding three hundred dollars, as the Secretary may determine for the procuration of such substitute,” 37th Cong. Sess.3, 12 Stat. 731, March 3, 1863. 7 Some men would volunteer and collect a bounty in one locality, then desert their unit and reenlist in a new district to collect another bounty. 8 Rioting was largely led by the white working class, who could not afford exemptions under the law. Racial tensions also contributed, as most black workers were not considered citizens and thus not eligible for the draft. White laborers were also concerned about job competition from freed slaves following the January 1863 Emancipation Proclamation. Iver Bernstein, The New York City Draft Riots; Significance for American Society and Politics in the Age of the Civil War (NY: Oxford University Press, 1990), p. 9-10. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 3 service by the payment of commutation, and 117,986 furnished substitutes.9 Volunteerism during this war was likely driven in part by the bounty system. Selective Service Act of 1917 and World War I Conscription After the Civil War, the federal government did not use conscription again until World War I (WWI). By then a new concept for a draft system termed “Selective Service” had been developed that would apportion requirements for manpower to the states and through the states to individual counties.10 By 1915, Europe was in all-out war; the United States had a small volunteer Army of approximately 100,000 men. On April 2, 1917, President Woodrow Wilson asked Congress for a declaration of war, and on May 18, 1917, he signed an act commonly known as the Selective Service Act of 1917 into law.11 This new law allowed the President to draft the National Guard into federal service (rather than calling the militia into federal service) and made all male citizens between the ages of 21 and 31 liable for the draft.12 On July 15, 1917, Congress enacted a provision that all conscripted persons would be released from compulsory service within four months of a presidential proclamation of peace.13 In 1918, Congress extended the eligible draft age to include all males between the ages of 18 and 45. World War I was the first instance of conscription of United States citizens for overseas service. A key aspect of the Selective Service Act of 1917 was that it allowed the federal government to select individuals from a pool of registrants for federal service. Unlike the Civil War, a shortage of volunteers was not the primary concern in enacting this legislation. The selective aspects of the WWI draft law were driven by concerns that indiscriminate volunteerism could adversely affect the domestic economy and industrial base. In support of the selective service law, Senator William M. Calder of New York said, “under a volunteer system, there is no way of preventing men from leaving industries and crippling resources that are just as important as the army itself.”14 In contrast to the Civil War draft, the Selective Service Act of 1917 did not allow for the furnishing of substitutes or bounties for enlistment. It also provided for decentralized administration through local and district draft boards that were responsible for registering and classifying men, and calling registrants into service.15 The law specified that the President would appoint boards consisting of civilian members “not connected with the Military Establishment.” Over 4,600 such boards were established to hear and decide on claims for exemptions. 16 The 9 E.H. Crowder, Second Report of the Provost Marshal General to the Secretary of War On the Operations of the Selective Service System to December 20, 1918 , Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, 1919, p. 376. 10 Bernard D. Rostker, I Want You! The Evolution of the All-Volunteer Force, RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA, 2006. 11 P.L. 65-12, 40 Stat.76. Also known as the Selective Draft Act. 12 The act exempted federal and state officials and ministers and theological students. Members of religious sects forbidding participation in war were to be held for noncombatant service only. 13 P.L. 65-23, June 15, 1917. 14 John L. Rafuse, “United States’ Experience with Volunteer and Conscript Forces,” in Studies Prepared for the President’s Commission on an All-Volunteer Armed Force, vol.2. District of Columbia: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1970, p. III-1-23. 15 Classifications included “eligible and liable for military service”, temporary deferments and exemptions, and full exemptions based on individual circumstances. 16 B.W. Patch, “Conscription in the United States,” in Editorial Research Reports 1940, vol. II, Washington D.C., CQ Press, 1940. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 4 provost marshal general, at the time Major General Enoch Crowder, oversaw the operation of these boards. The first draft lottery was held on July 20, 1917.17 Out of the 24.2 million that registered for the draft in WWI, 2.8 million were eventually inducted. While the law did not prohibit volunteers, the implementation of the selective service system alongside a volunteer system became too complex and the Army discontinued accepting volunteer enlistees by December 15, 1917.18 By 1919, at the end of the war, the provost marshal general was relieved from his duties, all registration activities were terminated, and all local and district boards were closed. In 1936, the Secretaries of War and the Navy created the Joint Army-Navy Selective Service Committee to manage emergency mobilization planning.19 The committee was headed by Army Major Lewis B. Hershey. Between WWI and WWII, the Armed Forces shrank in numbers due to both treaty commitments and public attitudes toward a large standing force. In the interwar period, two opposing movements emerged. Some were in support of legislative provisions that would empower the President to conscript men for military service upon a declaration of war, and some called for a universal draft, universal military training, or broader authorities to conscript civilian labor in times of both war and peace.20 Others proposed provisions that would require a national referendum on any future use of conscription, or would forbid conscripts from serving outside the territorial borders of the United States. The Selective Training and Service Act and World War II In 1940, Europe was already at war, and despite the neutrality of the United States at the time, some in Congress argued that the United States could not continue with a peacetime force while other nations were mobilizing on a massive scale.21 In June 1940, President Franklin D. Roosevelt announced that he would recommend a program of universal compulsory government service for American youth (men and women).22 A few days later a conscription bill, modeled on the Selective Service Act of 1917, was sponsored by Senator Edward Burke and Representative James Wadsworth in their respective chambers. The bill garnered support by senior Army leaders, who expressed concerns about the ability to recruit a sufficient number of volunteers necessary to fight a major war.23 Some in Congress opposed to the bill argued the following: 17 Draft numbers were placed in capsules and drawn from a large fishbowl to establish the order for reporting for induction. Those whose draft number was called first were the first to be required to report for induction. 18 The Navy followed and Marine Corps stopped accepting volunteer enlistments after August 8, 1918. B.W. Patch, “Conscription in the United States,” in Editorial Research Reports 1940, vol. II (CQ Press, 1940). 19 Bernard D. Rostker, I Want You! The Evolution of the All-Volunteer Force, RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA, 2006. 20 B.W. Patch, “Conscription in the United States,” in Editorial Research Reports 1940, vol. II, Washington D.C., CQ Press, 1940. 21 John L. Rafuse, “United States’ Experience with Volunteer and Conscript Forces,” in Studies Prepared for the President’s Commission on an All-Volunteer Armed Force, vol.2. District of Columbia: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1970. 22 B.W. Patch, “Revision of the Draft System,” in Editorial Research Reports 1941, vol. I, Washington D.C., CQ Press, 1941. 23 In testimony, General Marshall, Army Chief of Staff, stated that he was in favor of a selective-training bill, and in media interviews stated his concerns that expansion of the Army beyond 375,000 could not be achieved through voluntary enlistment alone. Patch, B.W., “Conscription in the United States,\" Editorial Research Reports 1940, vol. II, (Washington D.C., CQ Press, 1940. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 5 Regimentation of American life as provided for by the Burke-Wadsworth bill in peacetime is abhorrent to the ideals of patriotic Americans and is utterly repugnant to American democracy and American traditions ... no proof or evidence was offered to indicate that the personnel needs of the Army and Navy cannot be obtained on a voluntary basis.24 The conscription bill became the Selective Training and Service Act, and was signed into law on September 16, 1940, by Franklin D. Roosevelt.25 The act was the first instance of peacetime conscription in the United States and required men between aged 21 through 35 to register with local draft boards. The law required a 12-month training period for those inducted, at which time the inductees would be transferred to a reserve component of the Armed Forces for 10 years. Criminal penalties for failing to comply with registration or other duties under this act included “imprisonment of not more than five years or a fine of not more than $10,000, or by both such fine and imprisonment.”26 The act also gave the President the authority to establish a Selective Service System, and to appoint a Director of the Selective Service with oversight of local civilian boards. Because the image of civilian leadership was deemed important during a time of peace, in 1940 the President initially appointed Dr. Clarence Dykstra as Director of the Selective Service while also retaining his position as president of the University of Wisconsin.27 Due to poor health Dykstra never took up his position as Director of Selective Service. In July 1941, the JANSSC that had been established in the interwar period became the new Selective Service headquarters and Colonel Lewis B. Hershey was appointed as the Director, a position he held until 1970, departing with the rank of Lieutenant General.28 In terms of the implementation of the Selective Service System, there was an emphasis on establishing an equitable lottery system administered by decentralized local draft boards as was deemed a successful approach during WWI: The Selective Training and Service Act of 1940 is based on the principle that the obligation and privileges of military training and service should be shared generally in accordance with a fair and just system of compulsory military training and service.... The public expected that the lottery under the new law would be conducted as the lottery of 1917-1918 was conducted, and those charged with the administration of the Selective Service felt likewise.29 The 6,442 district boards assigned a number to each registrant in their district. 30 On October 29, 1940, the first draft lottery was held in a similar manner to the WWI draft lottery and draft inductions into the Army began on November 18, 1940.31 The lottery system was used for three 24 B.W. Patch, “Conscription in the United States,” Editorial Research Reports 1940, Vol. II , Washington D.C., CQ Press, 1940. 25 P.L. 76-784, 54 Stat. 885. This was also known as the Burke-Wadsworth Act. 26 P.L. 76-784, Section 11. 27 John Costa, The History and Operation of the Selective Service System: 1917-1966, Legislative Research Service, December 12, 1969. 28 Bernard D. Rostker, I Want You! The Evolution of the All-Volunteer Force, RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA, 2006. 29 First Report of the Director of Selective Service: 1940-1941. United States Selective Service System, Washington, D.C. 30Stephen E. Feinberg, “Randomization and Social Affairs: The 1970 Draft Lottery.” Science, vol. 171, no. 3968, 1971, pp. 255–261. JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/1730983. Accessed 27 Apr. 2020. 31 B.W. Patch, “Revision of the Draft System,” in Editorial Research Reports 1941, vol. I Washington D.C., CQ Press, 1941. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 6 groups of registrants, then abandoned in 1942 and not used again for the draft until 1969 during the Vietnam conflict.32 In the interim, draftees were inducted by local boards based on required quotas and contemporary policies for classification, age, and order of precedence. Although some complaints arose over inequalities and inconsistencies in the draft administration, a Gallup poll conducted in 1941 found that 93% of those polled thought the draft had been handled fairly in their community.33 Volunteers were allowed to serve; however, approximately 10 million of the 16 million servicemembers who served during WWII were draftees.34 Consideration of a Draft for Nurses Following the invasion of Normandy in 1944 and other battles with high casualty rates, the Army was reporting a shortage of nurses to care for the wounded and a shortfall in recruiting efforts. In his 1945 State of the Union (SOTU) address, President Franklin D. Roosevelt called for a draft to increase the number of nurses, stating: The inability to get the needed nurses for the Army is not due to any shortage of nurses; 280,000 registered nurses are now practicing in this country. It has been estimated by the War Manpower Commission that 27,000 additional nurses could be made available to the armed forces without interfering too seriously with the needs of the civilian population for nurses. Since volunteering has not produced the number of nurses required, I urge that the Selective Service Act be amended to provide for the induction of nurses into the armed forces. The need is too pressing to await the outcome of further efforts at recruiting.35 Shortly after the SOTU, the House Committee on Military Affairs met to consider legislation for the registration and draft of “trained and skilled women nurses.”36 One version of the bill (H.R. 2277) would have required females between the ages of 20 and 45 who had graduated from a 2-year course of instruction to register for selection and induction.37 In testimony, the Surgeon General recommended broadening the medical draft to also support civilian needs, stating It is for these reasons that I recommend the selective-service principle for professional nurses to include minimum civilian as well as total military needs. This is total war. We must mobilize fully to guard against collapse on any front, military or civilian.38 Senior representatives in the nursing profession supported the initiative but called for it to be part of a Selective Service act for all women, not just those qualified as nurses.39 Other groups opposed to the legislation claimed it was unconstitutional to establish a draft of individuals based on their class of work or expertise, and questioned 32 As manpower needs for the war grew, some men initially deferred were reclassified and amendments were made to change the age bracket for eligibility. This complicated the lottery system to a point where the House Armed Services Committee assessed it as “an involved and tiresome procedure which imposed an unnecessary operational burden on all echelons of the Selective Service,” and thus created “considerable injustice and confusion.” Costa, John, The History and Operation of the Selective Service System: 1917-1966, Legislative Research Service, December 12, 1969, p. 100083. 33 B. W. Patch, “Revision of the Draft System,” in Editorial Research Reports 1941, vol. I (CQ Press, 1941). 34 Rafuse, John L., “United States’ Experience with Volunteer and Conscript Forces,” in Studies Prepared for the President’s Commission on an All-Volunteer Armed Force, Vol.2. District of Columbia: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1970, p III-1-29. 35 Franklin D. Roosevelt, State of the Union Address, January 6, 1945, p. 7. Available at https://catalog.archives.gov/id/122204654. 36 U.S. Congress, House Committee on Military Affairs, Hearing on H.R. 1284, an Act to Insure Adequate Medical Care for the Armed Forces, 79th Cong., 1st sess., January 19, 1945 (Washington: GPO, 1945). 37 H.R. 1666, 79th Cong., 1st sess. The bill text clarified that “wherever the word 'female' or 'she' is used, it shall be deemed to include male nurses.” 38 U.S. Congress, House Committee on Military Affairs, Hearing on H.R. 1284, an Act to Insure Adequate Medical Care for the Armed Forces, Statement of Dr. Thomas Parran, Surgeon General, United States Public Health Service, 79th Cong., 1st sess., January 19, 1945 (Washington: GPO, 1945), p. 54. 39 S. Congress, Senate Committee on Military Affairs, Hearing on H.R. 2277, an Act to Insure Adequate Medical Care for the Armed Forces, 79th Cong., 1st sess., January 19, 1945 (Washington: GPO, 1945) p. 9. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 7 the ability of the War Department to effectively and efficiently manage the nursing resources already at its disposal.40 The bill to draft nurses (H.R. 2277) passed the House on March 7, 1945 by a vote of 347 to 42, and was referred in the Senate on March 29, 1945.41 The Senate twice deferred action on the bill, and it was never enacted. Consideration of Universal Compulsory Service With the induction authority under the Selective Training and Service Act set to expire in 1945, some felt that the emergency conscription program should evolve into a permanent system of universal military training (UMT). 42 The Roosevelt Administration proposed a system that required one year of compulsory training at age 18 for all physically qualified men. In 1945, the congressional Committee on Postwar Military Policy held a series of open hearings on compulsory military training.43 Those in favor of maintaining some form of conscription, including groups like the American Legion, and the Chamber of Commerce, argued that it would provide a deterrent to future “Hitlers and Hirohitos” as well as build the health and character of American youth.44 Those opposed, including organized labor groups and the NAACP, contended that continued conscription was antithetical to democratic ideals, was an inefficient mechanism for building force structure, and led to war, international distrust, and profiteering. 45 As the Committee on Postwar Military Policy was not empowered to propose legislation, the debate did not result in congressional action with respect to UMT.46 Instead, Congress extended the induction authority under the Selective Training and Service Act in 1945, and again in 1946 and 1947, allowing it to lapse on March 31, 1947. In 1947 the Administration under President Truman again pushed for UMT, appointing a commission to study the issue. The President’s Advisory Commission on Universal Training (the Compton Report) advocated for UMT as “a matter of urgent necessity”.47 The Administration subsequently proposed six months of mandatory training. This proposal was reported out of the House Armed Services Committee in July 1947 but never brought to the House floor and was not considered in the Senate.48 Post-World War II, the Selective Service Act of 1948 In 1947, when the authorities under the Selective Service Act expired, all functions and responsibilities of the Selective Service System were transferred to the Office of Selective 40 Ibid. Statement of Mrs. Agnes Waters, Representing the National Blue Star Mothers of America, p. 117. 41 \"House Votes, 342 to 42 for Bill for Draft Nurses,\" New York Times, March 8, 1945. 42 Proposals for compulsory military service garnered support from the Secretary of War, the Secretary of the Navy, the Selective Service Director, and many in Congress. Huddle, F. P., “ Universal Military Service,” Editorial Research Reports 1944, Vol. I (CQ Press, 1944). 43 F. Brewer, “Peacetime Conscription,” Editorial Research Reports 1945, Vol. II (CQ Press, 1945). 44 F.P. Huddle, “Universal Military Service,” Editorial Research Reports 1944, Vol. I (CQ Press, 1944). Gus C. Lee and Geoffrey Y. Parker, Ending the Draft - The Story of the All Volunteer Force, DOD Human Resource Research Organization, April 1977, p. 14. 45 Ibid. 46 Gus C. Lee and Geoffrey Y. Parker, Ending the Draft - The Story of the All Volunteer Force, DOD Human Resource Research Organization, April 1977, p. 14. 47 Ibid. p. 15. President’s Advisory Commission on Universal Training, A Program for National Security, May 29, 1947, GPO, p. 2. 48 Ibid. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 8 Service Records.49 This office, by law, had a limited mandate for knowledge preservation, and maintenance and storage of individual records. This restructuring essentially put the Selective Service System into a deep standby mode. By 1948, the military had shrunk in size to less than 1.5 million from a peak of 12 million in 1945. Concerned about lagging recruiting efforts and the rising power of the Soviet Union, Congress authorized reinstatement of the draft in the Selective Service Act of 1948, which was signed into law by President Truman on June 24, 1948.50 The act was similar to previous acts authorizing the Selective Service System. It established registration requirements for males ages 19 to 26, and the same criminal penalties for fraudulent registration or evasion. It also dissolved the Office of Selective Service Records and transferred its responsibilities back to the newly established Selective Service System as an independent agency of the federal government. Under this act, the President had authority to appoint state directors of the Selective Service System. It also provided the authority to call National Guard and Reserve personnel into active duty to support the administration of state and national headquarters. Korean War and the Universal Military Training and Service Act of 1951 The Selective Service Act of 1948 was set to expire on June 24, 1950. Due to budget constraints and absence of an immediate threat to national security, between 1948 and 1949 conscription was only used to fill recruiting shortfalls. On June 25, 1950, war broke out between North and South Korea. A bill to extend the Selective Service Act of 1948 was already in conference, and the Senate rushed to it on June 28 and it was signed by the President on June 30, 1950.51 The following year, Congress renamed the act the Universal Military Training52 and Service Act of 1951.53 The act extended the draft until July 1, 1955, and also lowered the registration age to 18. 54 As the new name suggested, the law also contained a clause that would have obligated all eligible males to perform 12 months of military service and training within a National Security Training Corps if amended by future legislation (it was never amended). The act did not alter the structure or functions of the SSS; however, it did require the Director to submit an annual report to Congress on  the number of persons registered,  the number of persons inducted, and  the number of deferments granted and the basis for them. 49 P.L. 80-26. 50 P.L. 80-759. Also known as the Elston Act. 51 “Universal Military Training and Service,” In CQ Almanac 1951, 7th ed. Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly, 1952. 52 Universal military training is a term used to describe a variety of concepts under which all (typically male) citizens would receive some minimum amount of compulsory training. Following the training some may enter active status, some would enter active reserve units, and others could be placed on inactive status to be subject to a draft if needed. Switzerland, Israel, and Sweden have all implemented some form of UMT. 53 P.L. 82-51. 54 However, individuals were not liable to be drafted until 18 years and six months, and not allowed to be inducted until they reached the age of 19. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 9 The United States inducted approximately 1.5 million men into the military (one-quarter of the total uniformed servicemembers) under this act in support of the Korean conflict. A draft lottery was not used in this era, rather, the DOD issued draft calls, and quotas were issued to local boards. The local boards would then fill their quotas with those classified as “1-A”, or “eligible for military service” by precedence as determined by policy.55 Public concerns with the draft at this time were equitable implementation of the draft due to the broad availability of deferments for what some saw as privileged groups. Others expressed concerns about the potential disruption of citizens’ lives.56 Between 1950 and 1964 Congress repeatedly extended the Universal Military Training and Service Act in four-year periods with minor amendments. During this time, volunteers made up approximately two-thirds of the total military force with the remainder supplemented through inductions—with some limited exceptions, the Navy, Air Force, and Marines relied on volunteers almost entirely.57 For example, monthly draft calls in 1959 were for approximately 9,000 men out of an eligible population of about 2.2 million.58 55 Precedence policy at the time was to fill quotas with delinquents first (those who had failed to register or had otherwise failed to meet requirements of the selective service law), followed by volunteers for induction, then 25 -year-olds down to 19-year-olds. Marshall, Burke, In Pursuit of Equity? Who Serves When Not All Serve? Report of the National Advisory Commission on Selective Service, Washington, D.C.: National Advisory Commission on Selective Service, 1967, p. 19. 56 John L Rafuse, “United States’ Experience with Volunteer and Conscript Forces,” in Studies Prepared for the President’s Commission on an All-Volunteer Armed Force, Vol.2. District of Columbia: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1970, p III-1-32. 57 Burke Marshall, In Pursuit of Equity? Who Serves When Not All Serve? Report of the National Advisory Commission on Selective Service, Washington, D.C.: National Advisory Commission on Selective Service, 1967, p. 11. 58 “Draft Extension,” in CQ Almanac 1959, 15th ed., 08-269-08-270. Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly, 1960. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 10 The Doctor Draft and The Berry Plan A 1950 amendment to the Selective Service Act of 1948, commonly referred to as the Doctor Draft, provided for the “special registration, classification, and induction of certain medical, dental, and allied specialist categories.” 59 The law allowed for draft calls for medical professionals up to 50 years of age for a period of service for no longer than 21 months. The law also established a National Advisory Committee to coordinate with states and localities to ensure that consideration was given to the needs of the civilian populations in communities with few medical personnel. Members of the reserve component were not liable for registration or induction. The law, however, also provided a special pay entitlement to reserve medical and dental officers involuntarily ordered to active duty, as well as to those volunteering for active duty. This was designed as in incentive for draft-liable medical professionals to voluntarily serve in lieu of being inducted as an enlisted member.60 The Doctor Draft was extended twice. Amendments in 1955 reduced the age limit to 46 and allowed it to expire on July 1, 1957.61 At that time, facing objections to the draft from organizations such as the American Medical Association, DOD indicated that it would not seek a further extension of the authorization.62 In the meantime, DOD had also initiated other mechanisms incentivizing medical service. Dr. Frank B. Berry, who served as the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health and Medical Affairs starting in 1954, implemented a program under which both civilian hospitals and the military were able to meet staffing needs. This program, which came to be known as The Berry Plan, allowed doctors to defer obligatory military service until completion of medical education and training.63 Those that did not choose one of the options risked being drafted through the regular registration process, which encouraged participation. It is estimated that about two-thirds of physicians that served between 1950 and 1973 were obtained through the draft or through the Berry Plan. 64 The Vietnam War and Proposals for Draft Reform In 1964, when America significantly escalated its military involvement in Vietnam, conscription was again used to mobilize manpower and augment the volunteer force. Among the criticisms of the draft system during this period were that it was inequitable and discriminatory since the chance of being drafted varied by state, by local community, and by one’s economic status. In the late 1960s, public acceptance of the draft began to erode for the following reasons, inter alia:65  Opposition to the war in Vietnam.  The U.S. Army’s desire for change due to discipline problems among some Vietnam draftees.  Belief that the state did not have a right to impose military service on young men without consent.  Belief that the draft was an unfair “tax” being imposed only on young men in their late teens and twenties.66 59 P.L. 81-779, Sep. 9, 1950. The allied specialist category included veterinarians, optometrists, pharmacists, and osteopaths. 60 DOD, Military Compensation Background Papers, 8th Edition, July 2018, p. 432. 61 P.L. 84-118. 62 DOD, \"A Message from the A.M.A,\" U.S. Armed Forces Medical Journal, vol. VIII, no. 1 (1957), p. 130. 63 The plan offered three choices, 1) service immediately after internship, 2) service after one year of residency following internship with a return to the residency post-service, and 3) full residency training in a specialty of the doctor’s choice prior to service. Frank B. Berry, M.D., \"The Story of \"The Berry Plan\",\" Bull NY Academy of Medicine, vol. 52, no. 3 (1976), p. 281. 64 Gus C. Lee and Geoffrey Y. Parker, Ending the Draft - the Story of the All Volunteer Force, Final Report, DOD, Human Resources Research Organization Alexandria, VA, April 1977, p. 327. 65 Bernard D. Rostker, I Want You! The Evolution of the All-Volunteer Force, RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA, 2006. 66 For example, if pay would have to be $25,000 per year to attract sufficient volunteers to military service, but these The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 11  Perception of some observers that the draft placed an unfair burden on underprivileged members of society.67  Demographic change increasing the size of the eligible population for military service relative to the needs of the military.68  Estimations that an all-volunteer force could be fielded within acceptable budget levels.69 In response to some of these concerns and associated political pressures, President Lyndon B. Johnson issued Executive Order 11289 on July 2, 1966, establishing the National Advisory Commission on Selective Service headed by Burke Marshall. President Johnson instructed the commission to consider past, present, and prospective functioning of the Selective Service System and other systems of national service, taking into account the following factors :  Fairness to all citizens,  Military manpower requirements,  Minimizing uncertainty and interference with individuals’ careers and educations,  National social, economic, and employment goals, and  Budgetary and administrative considerations. The commission examined a number of potential options from requiring everyone to serve to elimination of all compulsory service. The commission’s final report, In Pursuit of Equity: Who Serves When not all Serve?, was delivered to the President in February 1967 at the time when the Selective Service law was up for renewal. The commission recommended continuing conscription but making significant changes to the Selective Service System to “assure equal treatment for those in like circumstances.”70 Among these recommended changes were (1) adopting an impartial and random selection process and order of call, (2) consolidating the local boards under centralized administration with uniform policies for classification, deferment, and exemptions, and (3) ensuring that composition of local boards was representative of the population that they served.71 In parallel with the Presidential Commission’s review, the House Armed Services Committee chartered their own review with a civilian advisory panel chaired by retired Army General Mark volunteers are instead drafted at $17,000 per year, the draftees pay a tax of $8,000 per year each. 67 For a further discussion of these issues see CRS Report R44321, Diversity, Inclusion, and Equal Opportunity in the Armed Services: Background and Issues for Congress, by Kristy N. Kamarck. 68 The male youth cohort age 18-27 in 1942 was approximately 10.7 million. By 1965, this age cohort was 12.5 million. 69 Previous arguments against the all-volunteer force had been that the cost of recruiting and retaining such a force would put a significant strain on military budgets, and that it would not be viable in the event of a large scale conflict with high casualties. 70 National Advisory Commission on Selective Service, In Pursuit of Equity: Who Serves When Not All Serve, Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, 1967, p. 4, 8 -9. According to the Commission’s report, the deciding factor in rejecting an exclusively all-volunteer force was the inability of such a system to rapidly procure large numbers of men if they were needed in a crisis. Compulsory universal national service was rejected by the Commission who cited a lack of constitutional basis for such service. 71 In some case, the board composition was not demographically representative of the population that they served. The commission found that members of local boards were all male, mostly veterans, mostly white-collar workers, and almost exclusively white. National Advisory Commission on Selective Service, In Pursuit of Equity: Who Serves When Not All Serve, Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, 1967, p. 19. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 12 Clark. The Clark panel also recommended against shifting to an all-volunteer force but disagreed on the establishment of a lottery.72 In 1967, Congress extended the SSS through July 1, 1971, under the renamed Military Selective Service Act of 1967 (henceforth MSSA). While the Administration had pushed for comprehensive draft reform based on the commission’s recommendations, the bill contained few of President Lyndon Johnson’s proposals. In particular, the bill, as enacted, prohibited the President from establishing a random system of selection (draft lottery) without congressional approval.73 In 1969, President Richard M. Nixon called on Congress to provide the authority to institute the draft lottery system. In response, Congress amended the 1967 law, repealing the prohibition on the President’s authority. 74 On the same day, President Nixon signed Executive Order 11497 establishing the order of call for the draft lottery for men aged 19 through 25 at the end of calendar year 1969. In the first year, all males age 19 through 25 were to be in the lottery. After that, only those who turned 19 each year were entered into the lottery, and were susceptible for a single year to being drafted. While the draft remained contentious, in 1971 the induction authority under the MSSA was again extended through 1973.75 In response to concerns regarding the composition of local boards, the bill stated, The President is requested to appoint the membership of each local board so that to the maximum extent practicable it is proportionately representative of the race and national origin of those registrants within its district. The bill also included a significant pay raise for military members as a first step toward building an all-volunteer force. The Gates Commission Two months into President Nixon’s first term, he launched the President’s Commission on an All-Volunteer Force, which came to be known as the Gates Commission. In its 1970 report, the commission unanimously recommended that “the nation’s best interests will be better served by an all-volunteer force, supported by an effective standby draft, than by a mixed force of volunteers and conscripts.”76 The Gates Commission also recommended maintaining a Selective Service System that would be responsible for  a register of all males who might be conscripted when essential for national security,  a system for selection of inductees, 72 Bernard D. Rostker, I Want You! The Evolution of the All-Volunteer Force, RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA, 2006, p. 31. 73 This Administration proposal, called the FAIR (fair and impartial random) system, had been a key component of the proposed reform package. “Message to Congress: Johnson on Selective Service,” in CQ Almanac 1967, 23rd ed., Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly, 1968. 74 Selective Service Amendment Act of 1969 (P.L. 91-124). 75 Due to a lengthy debate in Congress and fierce opposition to maintaining the draft, the legislation was delayed and the draft was not in effect for nearly three months from July 1, 1971, to September 28, 1971, when the draft extension (P.L. 92-129) was signed into law. “Draft Extended After War, Foreign Policy Debate.” in CQ Almanac 1971, 27th ed., 06-257-06-296. Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly, 1972. 76 The Report of the President's Commission on an All-Volunteer Armed Force, February 1970. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 13  specific procedures for the notification, examination, and induction of those to be conscripted,  an organization to maintain the register and administer the procedures for induction, and  the provision that a standby draft system may be invoked only by resolution of Congress at the request of the President.77 The last draft calls were issued in December 1972 and the statutory authority to induct expired on June 30, 1973.78 On January 27, 1973, Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird announced the end of conscription. The last man to be inducted through the draft entered the Army on June 30, 1973.79 Table 1 shows the number of inductees and total participants for each major conflict in which the United States used the draft and for which data are available. More than half of the participants in WWI and nearly two-thirds of the WWII participants were draftees. About one-quarter of the participants in the Korean and Vietnam conflicts were draftees, however, it should be noted that the possibility of being drafted may have induced higher rates of volunteerism during these later conflicts.80 Table 1. Draft Inductees and Total Participants in Major Conflicts Conflict Total Conscripts Total Participants % Conscripts of Total Participants Civil War (Union only) 168,649* 2,690,401 6.2% WWI 2,810,296 4,734,991 59.4% WWII 10,110,104 16,112,566 62.7% Korea 1,529,539 5,720,000 26.7% Vietnam 1,857,304 8,744,000 21.3% Source: Total conscripts are those inducted into service as reported by the Selective Service System (https://www.sss.gov/About/History-And-Records/Induction-Statistics). Total participants are from the Department of Veterans Affairs at http://www.va.gov/opa/publications/factsheets/fs_americas_wars.pdf. Civil War data are taken from Crowder, E.H., Second Report of the Provost Marshal General to the Secretary of War On the Operations of the Selective Service System to December 20, 1918 , Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, 1919, p. 376. Notes: Figures for total participants are rounded to the nearest thousand in the source document for Vietnam and Korea. The total number of conscripts in the Civil War is only those actually inducted into service and includes those who were furnished as substitutes but excludes those who were drafted but paid a commutation in lieu of service. 77 The Report of the President's Commission on an All-Volunteer Armed Force, February 1970. 78 Selective Service System, Semiannual Report of the Director of Selective Service, Together with A Report on the 1980 National Selective Service Registration , January 30, 1981, 1983, p. 2. 79 The last man was a draft evader who actually had been called in 1969, but fought his induction. The federal government responded with an indictment for failure to report. Finally, facing a courthouse o ffer to serve or be imprisoned, he reported for induction. Dwight Elliott Stone, the last draftee, was inducted into the United States Army on June 30, 1973, the last day inductions were authorized. David Wood, \"Last Draftee, Who Tried to Hide, Now Believes in Service,\" Seattle Times, June 22, 1993. 80 The RAND Corporation estimated that 77% of non-prior service accessions during the Vietnam conflict were motivated by the draft lottery. Bernard D. Rostker, I Want You! The Evolution of the All-Volunteer Force, RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA, 2006, p.245. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 14 All-Volunteer Force (AVF) and a Standby SSS President Gerald Ford temporarily suspended the registration requirement through Proclamation 4360 (89 Stat. 1255) in April 1975.81 The MSSA was not repealed, however, and the requirement for the SSS to be ready to provide untrained manpower in a military emergency remained. This proclamation essentially put the SSS into deep standby mode. Between 1975 and 1977, the SSS reduced operational functions and shifted into a new role as a planning agency.82 At the time there were approximately 98 full-time staff operating a pared-down field structure with a national headquarters and nine regional headquarters.83 In the late 1970s, some were concerned that this “deep standby” system did not have the resources or infrastructure to register, select, classify, and deliver the first inductees within 30 days from the start of an emergency mobilization. 84 These concerns became even more salient when, in December 1979, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan. In his January 1980 State of the Union address, President Jimmy Carter announced his intention to resume draft registration requirements in the coming year.85 A Gallup Poll conducted in March 1980 found that 76% were in favor of a registration requirement for young men.86 Congress responded by providing $13.3 million in appropriations for the Selective Service System on June 25, 1980.87 President Carter signed Proclamation 4771 on July 2, 1980, reinstating the requirement for all 18- to 25-year-old males to register for the Selective Service, under the authority provided by the MSSA.88 Penalties for failing to register were the same as those first established in the 1940 Selective Training and Service Act (a fine of up to $10,000 and/or a prison term of up to five years). However, unlike in previous draft registration regulations, there was no requirement for men to undergo evaluation and classification for fitness to serve. The core functions of the reinstated SSS had five key components that are still largely in place today:  A registration process that is reliable and efficient.  An automated data processing system that could handle pre- and post-mobilization requirements. 81 Selective Service System at http://www.sss.gov/induct.htm. 82 Gus C. Lee and Geoffrey Y. Parker, Ending the Draft - the Story of the All Volunteer Force, Final Report, DOD, Human Resources Research Organization Alexandria, VA, April 1977. 83 Prior to being placed in standby, the SSS was supported by nearly 1,000 area offices, state headquarters, and between 3,000 and 4,000 local volunteer boards. Congressional Budget Office, The Selective Service System: Mobilization Capabilities and Options for Improvement, Washington, DC, November 1978. 84 The 30-day time frame was based on DOD’s projected wartime mobilization requirements. Congressional Budget Office, The Selective Service System: Mobilization Capabilities and Options for Improvement , Washington, DC, November 1978. 85 U.S. Congress, House Committee on Armed Services, Presidential Recommendations for Selective Service Reform , committee print, 96 th Cong., 2nd sess., February 11, 1980 (Washington: GPO, 1980). 86 The question posed was “Would you favor or oppose the registration of the names of all young men so that in the event of an emergency the time needed to call up men for a draft would be reduced.” Selective Service System, Semiannual Report of the Director of Selective Service, Together with A Report on the 1980 National Selective Service Registration, January 30, 1981, 1983, p. 5. 87 $8.6 million was for the registration of young males, and $4.7 million was for improving the SSS’s computing capability. “Congress Approves Draft Registration,” CQ Almanac 1980, 36th ed., 39-46. Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly, 1981. 88 94 Stat. 3775. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 15  A system for promulgation and distribution of orders for induction.  A claims process that can quickly insure all registrants’ rights to due process are protected.  A field structure that can support the claims process.89 Supporters of reestablishing the registration requirement for men argued that it would send a message to the Soviet Union that the United States was prepared to act to defend its interests and also that it would cut down the mobilization time in the event of a national emergency. Some argued that registration was not enough, and advocated for a return of peacetime conscription, universal military training, or compulsory national service.90 Organizations opposed to the reinstatement of registration requirements argued that registration forms were illegal because they required registrants to disclose their Social Security numbers. Others argued that the exemption of women in the draft law was unconstitutional.91 Carter’s proposal to Congress included legislative language that would have given the President the authority to register women. As justification for this proposal, he stated, My decision to register women is a recognition of the reality that both women and men are working members of our society. It confirms what is already obvious throughout our society – that women are now providing all types of skills in every profession. The military should be no exception. […] There is no distinction possible, on the basis of ability or performance, that would allow me to exclude women from an obligation to register.92 Congress rejected the President’s proposal to include women with an explanation under Title VIII of S. Rept. 96-826, [T]he starting point for any discussion of the appropriateness of registering women for the draft is the question of the proper role of women in combat. The principle that women should not intentionally and routinely engage in combat is fundamental, and enjoys wide support among our people. It is universally supported by military leaders who have testified before the committee, and forms the linchpin for any analysis of this problem. […] Current law and policy exclude women from being assigned to combat in our military forces, and the committee reaffirms this policy. The policy precluding the use of women in combat is, in the committee's view, the most important reason for not including women in a registration system. In 1981, the Supreme Court heard a challenge to the exception for women to register for Selective Service. In the Rostker v. Goldberg case, the Court held that the practice of only registering men for the draft was constitutional.93 In the majority opinion, Justice William Rehnquist wrote 89 U.S. Congress, House Committee on Armed Services, Presidential Recommendations for Selective Service Reform , committee print, 96 th Cong., 2nd sess., February 11, 1980 (Washington: GPO, 1980). 90 “Congress Approves Draft Registration,” CQ Almanac 1980, 36th ed., 39-46. Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly, 1981. 91 At the time, women accounted for approximately 8% of the active duty force, but were prohibited from serving in certain combat units and occupations by law and policy. For more information on the history of women in the Armed Forces, see CRS Report R44321, Diversity, Inclusion, and Equal Opportunity in the Armed Services: Background and Issues for Congress, by Kristy N. Kamarck. 92 Statement by the President, Office of the White House Press Secretary, February 8, 1980, as recorded in Selective Service System, Semiannual Report of the Director of Selective Service together with a Report on the 1980 National Selective Service Registration, April 1, 1980-September 30, 1980, January 30, 1981, p. 18-19. 93 453 U.S. 57 (1981). The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 16 [t]he existence of the combat restrictions clearly indicates the basis for Congress’ decision to exempt women from registration. The purpose of registration was to prepare for a draft of combat troops. Since women are excluded from combat, Congress concluded that they would not be needed in the event of a draft, and therefore decided not to register them. New Penalties for Registration Noncompliance The first national registration after the reinstatement of the requirement was held in 1980 through registration at local U.S. Post Offices.94 The registration rate for the 1980 registration was 87% within the two-week registration period and 95% through the fourth month of registrations. In 1973, the registration rates were 77% within 30 days of one’s 18th birthday as required by statute, and 90% through the fourth month.95 The Comptroller General estimated that, of the registrations submitted, there was a final accuracy level of 98%.96 Despite initial successes in registration, there was a push by many in Congress and the Reagan Administration to maintain public awareness of the requirements and to maintain high compliance rates. On January 21, 1982, President Ronald Reagan authorized a grace period until February 28, 1982, allowing those who had not registered to do so. In 1982, the Department of Justice (DOJ) began prosecution of those men who willfully refused to register for selective service.97 In the June 1983 SSS semiannual report to Congress, the agency reported that it had referred 341 persons to DOJ for investigation. At the time of the report, there were 11 indictments and 2 convictions. In the same year, there was a movement in Congress to tie eligibility for federal benefits to registration requirements. National Defense Authorization bills for Fiscal Year 1983 were reported to the House and Senate floor without any proposed amendments to the MSSA. However, on May 12, 1982, the bill was amended by Senators Hayakawa and Mattingly on the Senate floor to prohibit young male adults from receiving any federal student assistance under Title IV of the Higher Education Act if they cannot certify they had registered with Selective Service. The Senate passed the amendment as drafted by voice vote. Representative Jerry Solomon introduced a similar amendment on the House floor. In conference committee, Members added language to direct the Secretary of Education and the Director of Selective Service to jointly develop methods for certifying registration.98 This provision amending the MSSA was signed into law as part of the FY1983 NDAA with an effective date of July 1, 1983.99 Representative Solomon also led the effort to attach similar language to the Job Training Partnership Act of 1982, which was passed on October 13, 1982.100 This law prohibited those who failed to register from receiving certain federal job training assistance. Congress repealed the Job 94 Former Director of the Selective Service System from November 26, 1979, to July 31, 1981, Bernard Rostker, attributed the high rates of compliance and accuracy to the individual accountability imposed by face-to-face registrations. 95 Selective Service System, Semiannual Report of the Director of Selective Service, Together with a Report on the 1980 National Selective Service Registration , January 30, 1981, 1983, p. 13. 96 Ibid., p. 12. 97 Selective Service System, Semiannual Report of the Director of Selective Service, October 1, 1982-March 31, 1983, June 8, 1983. 98 The provision became widely known as the “Solomon Amendment.” 99 P.L. 97-252 §1113. 100 P.L. 97-300 §504. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 17 Training and Partnership Act and replaced it with the Workforce Investment Act of 1998; however, the statutory language enforcing the MSSA was maintained in the new law.101 In 1985, Congress added a provision to FY1986 NDAA that made an individual ineligible for federal civil service appointments if he “is not registered and knowingly and willfully did not so register before the requirement terminated or became inapplicable to the individual.”102 Congress also expressed support for the peacetime registration program as a “contribution to national security by reducing the time required for full defense mobilization,” and as sending “an important signal to our allies and to our potential adversaries of the United States defense commitment.”103 On November 6, 1986, President Reagan signed into law the Immigration Reform and Control Act.104 This law required males between the ages of 18 and 26 who are applying for legalization under the act to register for the Selective Service if they have not already done so. In response, the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) and the SSS established procedures for registering young men as part of the immigration application process.105 The Healthcare Personnel Delivery System (HCPDS) In the early 1980s, Congress raised concerns about readiness of the medical force and the ability of the Services to mobilize necessary medical personnel to deliver casualty care in the event of a war. The General Accounting Office (GAO) was asked to review this question and in 1981 released a report with recommendations for DOD, SSS, Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for improving wartime medical preparedness.106 GAO found that if mobilization for major conflict were to occur, DOD would not be able to meet medical personnel requirements, with the report stating, shortages of physicians, nurses, and enlisted medical personnel would be most severe, would reduce capability to deliver wartime care, and would begin to occur soon after mobilization. Shortages of surgical personnel would be especially critical because theater of operations requirements could not be met.107 Another finding was that while the civilian sector likely had sufficient medical personnel to augment the force, the responsible agencies did not have adequate plans in place to mobilize and train civilian practitioners to provide effective wartime care.108 With respect to the SSS, the GAO noted that there was no authority that would provide for a draft of individuals with specialty skills. As such, GAO recommended that DOD and SSS jointly develop legislative provisions for a standby post-mobilization draft of civilian medical personnel. By request of the SSS, in 1987 Congress authorized SSS spending to “design and develop such a standby system to prepare for the post -mobilization registration and classification of persons with essential health care delivery skills.”109 This law expanded the SSS mandate to also 101 P.L. 105-220 §188(h). 102 P.L. 99-145 §1622. The amendment was introduced in the Senate by Senator Strom Thurmond with broad support, and became known as the “Thurmond Amendment.” 103 P.L. 99-145 §1621. 104 P.L. 99-603 §245A(4)(D). 105 Selective Service System, Semiannual Report of the Director of Selective Service, April 1, 1983-April 1, 1983, September 30, 1983, p. 10. 106 U.S. General Accounting Office, Will There Be Enough Trained Medical Personnel in Care of War, HRD-81-67, June 24, 1981, http://archive.gao.gov/f0102/115603.pdf. 107 Ibid., p. i. 108 The report also noted training and proficiency deficiencies for combat -oriented care among existing Army medical personnel, p. ii. 109 P.L. 100-180 §703; 50 U.S.C. §3809(h); U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Armed Services, National Defense Authorization Act for FY88 and FY89 , 100th Cong., May 8, 1987, S. Rpt 100-57. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 18 include responsibility to maintain “a structure for registration and classification of persons qualified for practice or employment in a health care occupation essential to the maintenance of the Armed Forces.”110 The standby system developed under this law is called the Health Care Personnel Delivery System (HCPDS). The system is designed to be implemented by the SSS in a national emergency if legislated by the Congress and approved by the President. Following these approvals, the SSS would conduct a mass registration of both male and female health care workers between the ages of 20 and 45.111 Other Legislative Proposals since 1980 Between 1980 and 2020, several Members of Congress proposed a number of legislative changes to the MSSA; however, none have been enacted. Typically, such proposed changes to the MSSA have included one or more of the following options:  Repeal the entire MSSA.112  Terminate the registration requirement.113  Reinstate draft induction authority.114  Defund the Selective Service System.115  Require women to register for the draft.116 Other proposed changes would seek to modify SSS record management or registration processes.117 These options are discussed in more detail later in this report. National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service In the FY2017 NDAA (P.L. 114-328), Congress established a National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service to help consider some of the options for the future of the MSSA. The commission is tasked not only with a review of the military selective service process, but also with proposing “methods to increase participation in military, national, and other public service, in order to address national security and other public service needs of the Nation.”118 The statutory scope of the commission is to review (1) The need for a military selective service process, including the continuing need for a mechanism to draft large numbers of replacement combat troops; (2) means by which to foster a greater attitude and ethos of service among United States youth, including an increased propensity for military service; (3) the feasibility and advisability of modifying the military selective service process in order to obtain for military, national, and public service individuals with skills (such as medical, dental, and nursing skills, language skills, cyber skills, and science, technology, 110 P.L. 100-180 §715. 111 Selective Service System, Return to the Draft, accessed on March 30, 2020 at https://www.sss.gov/about/return-to-draft/. 112 For example, H.R. 5492 (116th) 113 For example, H.R. 1495 (109th). 114 For example, S. 1697 (98th). 115 For example, H.Amdt. 37 to H.R. 1 (112th) or H.Amdt. 1232 to H.R. 5485 (114th). 116 For example, H.R. 747 (113th), H.R. 4478 (114th) or H.R. 1509 (114th). 117 For example, H.R. 5945 (116th). H.R. 4141 (115th)/ or H.R. 4412 (115th). 118 P.L. 114-328. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 19 engineering, and mathematics (STEM) skills) for which the Nation has a critical need, without regard to age or sex; and (4) the feasibility and advisability of including in the military selective service process, as so modified, an eligibility or entitlement for the receipt of one or more Federal benefits (such as educational benefits, subsidized or secured student loans, grants or hiring preferences) specified by the Commission for purposes of the review. Section 552 of the FY2017 NDAA also required DOD to prepare a preliminary report on the purpose and utility of the SSS to support the commission’s work, to include (1) A detailed analysis of the current benefits derived, both directly and indirectly, from the Military Selective Service System, including— (A) the extent to which mandatory registration benefits military recruiting; (B) the extent to which a national registration capability serves as a deterrent to potential enemies of the United States; and (C) the extent to which expanding registration to include women would impact these benefits. (2) An analysis of the functions currently performed by the Selective Service System that would be assumed by the Department of Defense in the absence of a national registration capability. (3) An analysis of the systems, manpower, and facilities that would be needed by the Department to physically mobilize inductees in the absence of the Selective Service System. (4) An analysis of the feasibility and utility of eliminating the current focus on mass mobilization of primarily combat troops in favor of a system that focuses on mobilization of all military occupational specialties, and the extent to which such a change would impact the need for both male and female inductees. (5) A detailed analysis of the Department’s personnel needs in the event of an emergency requiring mass mobilization, including— (A) a detailed timeline, along with the factors considered in arriving at this timeline, of when the Department would require— (i) the first inductees to report for service; (ii) the first 100,000 inductees to report for service; and (iii) the first medical personnel to report for service; and (B) an analysis of any additional critical skills that would be needed in the event of a national emergency, and a timeline for when the Department would require the firs t inductees to report for service. (6) A list of the assumptions used by the Department when conducting its analysis in preparing the report. DOD submitted its congressionally mandated report in July 2017. The report noted that the department “currently has no operational plans that envision mobilization at a level that would require conscription.” Nevertheless, it acknowledges that, “the readiness of the underlying systems, infrastructure, and processes to effect [a draft] – serve as a quiet but important hedge against an unknowable future.”119 GAO’s report, released in January 2018, noted that DOD’s requirements and timeline for mobilization of forces remain unchanged since 1994, despite changes to force structure, capability needs, national security environment, and strategic objectives.120 In particular, the report authors stated the following: 119 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, Report on the Purpose and Utility of a Registration System for Military Selective Service, July 2017, pp. 2 & 10. 120 U.S. Government Accountability Office, National Security: Ongoing Review of the Military Selective Service Process Could Benefit from Additional Information , GAO-18-226, January 2018, p. 11, https://www.gao.gov/assets/690/689390.pdf. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 20 DOD provided the personnel requirements and a timeline that was developed in 1994 and that have not been updated since. These requirements state that, in the event of a draft, the first inductees are to report to a Military Entrance Processing Station in 193 days and the first 100,000 inductees would report for service in 210 days. DOD’s report states that the all-volunteer force is of adequate size and composition to meet DOD’s personnel needs and it has no operational plans that envision mobilization at a level that would require a draft. Officials stated that the personnel requirements and timeline developed in 1994 are still considered realistic. Thus, they did not conduct any additional analysis to update the plans, personnel requirements, or timelines for responding to an emergency requiring mass mobilization. The authors stated that the GAO’s 2012 recommendation that DOD “establish a process of periodically reevaluating DOD’s requirements for the Selective Service System in light of changing operating environments, threats, and strategic guidance” remains valid. The National Commission on Military, National and Public Service released an interim report on its preliminary research findings on January 23, 2019. The Commission released its final report on March 25, 2020.121 With respect to the Selective Service and the draft the commission made several recommendations:  Maintain a military draft mechanism in the event of national emergencies;  Formalize a national call for volunteers prior to activating the draft;  Retain the Selective Service System's current registration posture;  Convey to registrants their potential obligation for military service;  Ensure a fair, equitable, and transparent draft, including a mechanism to allow corrective registration and avoid lifelong penalties;  Develop new voluntary models for accessing personnel with critical skills;  Improve the readiness of the National Mobilization System through institutionalized exercises and better accountability; and  Extend Selective Service registration to women.122 The Commission made several other recommendations to increase civic education and outreach, strengthen military recruiting and marketing, incentivize and expand national service, and improve personnel management in the military and federal civil service.123 Inspired to Serve Act; Draft Legislation The National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service provided a Legislative Annex containing the legislative proposals as required by section 555(e)(1) of the National Defense Authorization Act of Fiscal Year 2017 (P.L. 114-328). These proposals are presented in the form of a consolidated bill, the Inspire to Serve Act of 2020. The proposals, along with section-by-section analysis and redlines against existing law, are available on the Commission’s website, http://www.inspire2serve.gov 121 National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service, Inspired to Serve, Final Report, March 2020, https://inspire2serve.gov/reports/final-report. 122 Ibid. 123 According to P.L. 114-328, the law establishing the commission’s mandate, “military service” includes service in the active and reserve components of the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, and Space Force, as well as service in the commissioned corps of the Public Health Service and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 21 Selective Service Registration Today, nearly all males residing in the United States—U.S. citizens and documented or undocumented immigrant men—are required to register with the Selective Service if they are at least 18 years old and are not yet 26 years old. Those who are required to register must do so within 30 days of their 18th birthday unless exemptions apply as listed in Table 2. Men born from March 29, 1957, to December 31, 1959, were never required to register because the registration program was not in effect at the time they turned 18. Individuals are not allowed to register beyond their 26th birthday. Women are currently not required to register for the Selective Service. Federal regulations state, “No person who is not required by selective service law or the Proclamation of the President to register shall be registered.”124 All of those required to register would be considered “available for service” in the case of an emergency mobilization unless they were reclassified by the SSS.125 Table 2. Who Is Required to Register for the Selective Service? Category YES NO All male U.S. citizens born after Dec. 31, 1959, who are 18 but not yet 26 years old, except as noted below: √ Military Related Members of the Armed Forces on active duty (active duty for training does not constitute “active duty” for registration purposes) √* Cadets and Midshipmen at Service Academies or Coast Guard Academy √* Cadets at the Merchant Marine Academy √ Students in Officer Procurement Programs at the Citadel, North Georgia College and State University, Norwich University, Virginia Military Institute, Texas A&M University, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University √* Reserve Officers’ Training Corps Students √ National Guardsmen and Reservists not on active duty/Civil Air Patrol members √ Delayed Entry Program enlistees √ Separatees from Active Military Service, separated for any reason before age 26 √* Men rejected for enlistment for any reason before age 26 √ **Immigrants Lawful nonimmigrants on visas (e.g., diplomatic and consular personnel and families, foreign students, tourists with unexpired Form I-94, or Border Crossing Document DSP-150) √ Permanent resident immigrants (USCIS Form I-551)/Undocumented immigrants √ Special agricultural workers √ Seasonal agricultural workers (H-2A Visa) √ Refugee, parolee, and asylum immigrants √ Dual national U.S. citizens √ Confined 124 32 C.F.R. §1615.5. 125 For a description of those who might be eligible to for deferments or exemptions, please see text box tit led “Categories for Exemption or Deferment under Current SSS Operating Procedures.” The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 22 Category YES NO Incarcerated, or hospitalized, or institutionalized for medical reasons √* Handicapped physically or mentally Able to function in public with or without assistance √ Continually confined to a residence, hospital, or institution √ Gender Change/Transgender Individuals who are born female and changed their gender to male √ U.S. citizens or immigrants who are born male and change their gender to female √ Source: Selective Service Agency (https://www.sss.gov/Registration/Who-Must-Register/Chart). Notes: * These individuals must register within 30 days of release unless already age 26. To be fully exempt the individual must have been on active duty or confined continuously from age 18 to 26. ** Residents of Puerto Rico, Guam, Virgin Islands, and Northern Mariana Islands are U.S. citizens. Citizens of American Samoa are nationals and must register when they are habitual residents in the United States or reside in the United States for at least one year. Habitual residence is presumed and registration is required whenever a national or a citizen of the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, or Palau resides in the United States for more than one year in any status, except when the individual resides in the United States as an employee of the government of his homeland; or as a student who entered the United States for the purpose of full-time studies, as long as such person maintains that status. Immigrants who did not enter the United States or maintained their lawful nonimmigrant status by continually remaining on a valid visa until after they were 26 years old were never required to register. Also, immigrants born before 1960 who did not enter the United States or maintained their lawful nonimmigrant status by continually remaining on a valid visa until after March 29, 1975, were never required to register. Processes for Registration Almost all Selective Service registrations are completed electronically; however, registration can also be done at U.S. Post Offices and by submission of paper registrations.126 Forty-one states, four territories, and the District of Columbia (D.C.) have driver’s license legislation that provides for automatic Selective Service registration when obtaining a driver’s license, driver’s permit, or other form of identification from the Department of Motor Vehicles.127 In FY2019, 51% of all registrations, representing just over one million young men, were conducted electronically through driver’s license legislation (see Figure 1).128 The SSS also has interagency agreements for registration. In cooperation with U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS), immigrant men ages 18 through 25 who are accepted for permanent U.S. residence are registered automatically. In addition, men of registration age who apply for an immigrant visa through the Department of State are also registered. The application 126 The SSS reported that it received 92% of registrations elect ronically in FY2019. Selective Service System, Annual Report to the Congress of the United States: Fiscal Year 2019, Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs, 2019, p. 7. Handwritten paper registration forms require manual entry of data by Selective Service System staff. 127 States that did not have driver’s license legislation (DLL) at the end of FY2019 included Alaska, California, Massachusetts, Nebraska, New Jersey, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Vermont, and Wyoming. The Alaska Permanent Fund was created by the state of Alaska to pay Alaska residents a cash dividend from oil revenues. Under Alaska state law, before Alaska male residents can qualify for benefits from the Alaska Permanent Fund, they must be registered with the Selective Service System. Therefore, in Alaska there is limited value in DLL since the overwhelming majority of Alaska male residents are either already registered or will register to qualify for the benefits of this Fund. 128 Selective Service System, Annual Report to the Congress of the United States: Fiscal Year 2019, Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs, 2019, p. 8. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 23 form for federal student aid includes a “register me” checkbox for those who have not yet registered for the Selective Service, which authorizes the SSS to automatically register those individuals.129 The SSS reports that approximately 20% of its electronic registrant data come from the Department of Education (ED) as part of the Pell Grant student aid application process.130 The SSS also has existing data-sharing relationships with the DOD for new enlistments and the Department of Labor for applicants under the Workforce and Innovation Opportunity Act.131 Figure 1. Registrations by Method of Registration FY2019 Source: Selective Service System, Annual Report to the Congress of the United States: Fiscal Year 2019, Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs, 2019, p. 8. Registration compliance rate for the 18- through 25-year old age group was 91% in calendar year 2018, above the SSS goal of 90%.132 Reasons for noncompliance may include lack of awareness of requirements or purposeful avoidance. Knowingly failing to register comes with certain penalties including the following:  If indicted, imprisonment of not more than five years and/or fine of not more than $10,000 (increased to $250,000 in 1987 by 18 U.S.C. §3571(b)(3)).133 129 See questions 21 and 22 on the 2020-2021 Free Application for Student Aid (FAFSA) form, https://studentaid.gov/sites/default/files/2020-21-fafsa.pdf. 130 Selective Service System, Annual Report to the Congress of the United States: Fiscal Year 2019, Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs, 2019, p. 8. 131 P.L. 113-128. 132 Selective Service System, Annual Report to the Congress of the United States: Fiscal Year 2019, Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs, 2019, p. 7. 133 50 U.S.C. §3811(a). The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 24  Ineligibility for federal student aid.134  Ineligibility for appointment to a position in an executive agency.135  Ineligibility for certain federal job training benefits.136  Potential ineligibility for citizenship (for certain immigrants to the United States).137  Possible inability to obtain a security clearance.138 In addition, a large number of state legislatures as well as county and city jurisdictions have conditioned eligibility for certain government programs and benefits on SSS registration. 139 Failing to register for the Selective Service, or knowingly counseling, aiding, or abetting another to fail to comply with the MSSA, is considered a felony. Those who fail to register may have their names forwarded to the DOJ. In FY2018, 112,051 names and addresses of suspected violators were provided to DOJ.140 In practice, there have been no criminal prosecutions for failing to register since January 1986. At that time the SSS reported a total of 20 indictments with 14 convictions.141 Other penalties adversely affect the population required to register. For example, California estimated that between 2007 and 2014, young men in that state who failed to register were denied access to more than $99 million in federal and state financial aid and job training benefits. 142 There is some relief from penalties for those who fail to register. The MSSA establishes a statute of limitations on criminal prosecutions for evading registration to five years after a fraudulent registration or failure to register, whichever is first.143 Also, individuals may not be denied federal benefits for failing to register if  the requirement to register has terminated or become inapplicable to the person; and 134 50 U.S.C. §3811(f)(1) and C.F.R. §668.37. 135 5 U.S.C. §3328 and 5 C.F.R. 300.704—Considering individuals for appointment. 136 29 U.S.C. §1504. 137 According to an internal memo from the Immigrat ion and Naturalization Service (INS) on June 18, 1999, “ Section 316(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) requires a naturalization applicant to prove that he or she is, and has been for the requisite period, a person of good moral character, att ached to the principles of the Constitution of the United States, and well disposed toward the good order and happiness of the United States. Section 337(a)(5)(A) of the INA also requires applicants to declare under oath his or her willingness to bear arms on behalf of the United States when required by law. Therefore, it is INS policy that refusal to or knowing and willful failure to register for Selective Service during the period for which an applicant is required to prove his compliance with § 316(a)(3) supports a finding that the applicant is not eligible for naturalization, because he has failed to establish his willingness to bear arms when required and his disposition to the good order and happiness of the United States.” 138 Failure to obey a federal law could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in accordance with Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, Guideline J: Criminal Conduct, at http://www.state.gov/m/ds/clearances/60321.htm#j. 139 For a full list of provisions by States, Territories, and the District of Columbia, see https://www.sss.gov/Registration/State-Commonwealth-Legislation/Other-Legislations. 140 Selective Service System, Annual Report to the Congress of the United States: Fiscal Year 2018, Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs, 2018, p. 7. The number of referrals to DOJ was not reported in the FY2019 report. 141 Selective Service System, Semiannual Report of the Director of Selective Service, October 1, 1986-March 31, 1987. 142 Tina Griego, \"America May Never Have a Draft Again. But We’re Still Pun ishing Low-Income Men for not Registering,\" Washington Post, October 16, 2014. 143 50 U.S.C. §3811(d). The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 25  the person shows by a preponderance of the evidence that the failure of the person to register was not a knowing and willful failure to register.144 Individuals who unknowingly fail to register may ask for reconsideration from the official handling their case and may be required to submit evidence that they were unaware of their requirement to register. Selective Service System Agency Overview The SSS is an independent federal agency within the executive branch with headquarters located in Arlington, VA. It is not part of the Department of Defense. The agency is currently maintained as an active standby organization, which means that most of its functions are administrative. The statutory missions of the SSS are to maintain  a complete registration and classification structure capable of immediate operation in the event of a national emergency (including a structure for registration and classification of persons qualified for practice or employment in a health care occupation essential to the maintenance of the Armed Forces), and  personnel adequate to reinstitute immediately the full operation of the System, including military reservists who are trained to operate such System and who can be ordered to active duty for such purpose in the event of a national emergency.145 If the SSS were activated with the authority to induct individuals, the agency would be responsible for (1) holding a national draft lottery, (2) contacting registrants who are selected via the lottery, (3) arranging transportation for selectees to Military Entrance Processing Stations (MEPS) for testing and evaluation of fitness to serve, and (4) activating a classification structure that would include area offices, local offices, and appeal boards.146 Local boards would also evaluate claims for exemption, postponement, or deferments. Those classified as conscientious objectors would be required to serve in a noncombatant or nonmilitary capacity. For those permitted to serve in a nonmilitary capacity, the SSS would be responsible for placing these “alternative service workers” with alternate employers and tracking completion of 24 months of their required service. 144 50 U.S.C. §3811(g). 145 50 U.S.C. §3809(h). 146 Currently new voluntary recruits do a majority of their entry processing and testing at regional MEPS. Selective Service System, Congressional Budget Justification, FY2016 , Arlington, VA. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 26 Categories for Exemption or Deferment Under Current SSS Operating Procedures  Conscientious objectors perform service to the nation in a manner consistent with their moral, ethical, or religious opposition to participation in war in any form. Depending upon the nature of his beliefs, a conscientious objector serves either in a noncombatant capacity in the Armed Forces or in a civilian job contributing to the national interest.  Surviving sons or brothers in a family where the parent or sibling died as a result of U.S. military service, or is in a captured or missing in action status, are exempt from service in peacetime.  Hardship deferments are available for men whose induction would result in hardship to persons who depend upon them for support.  Members of Reserve components (including the National Guard and advanced level Reserve Officers’ Training Corps cadets who have already signed a Reserve contract) are eligible for a separate classification and perform their military service in the National Guard or the Reserves.  Ministers are exempted from service.  Ministerial students are deferred from service until they complete their studies.  Certain elected officials are exempt from service as long as they continue to hold office.  Veterans generally are exempt from service in peacetime.  Immigrants and dual nationals in some cases may be exempt from U.S. military service depending upon their place of residence and country of citizenship. Source: Selective Service System. Workforce and Organization The agency’s workforce is comprised of full-time career employees, part-time military and civilian personnel, and approximately 11,000 part-time civilian volunteers.147 In FY2019, the agency had 124 full-time equivalent civilian positions for administration and operations across agency headquarters, the Data Management Center, and three regional headquarters offices.148 Part-time employees include 56 State Directors representing the 50 states, four territories, the District of Columbia, and New York City. The median General Schedule (GS) grade for the agency is GS-11.149 The SSS maintains a list of unpaid volunteers who serve as local, district, and national appeal board members who could be activated to help decide the classification status of men seeking exemptions or deferments in the case of a draft. The SSS also has positions for 175 part-time Reserve Forces Officers (RFOs) representing all branches of the Armed Forces. 150 RFO duties include interviewing Selective Service board member candidates, training board members, participating in readiness exercises, supporting the registration public awareness effort, and maintaining space, equipment, and supplies.151 147 Selective Service System, Annual Report to the Congress of the United States: Fiscal Year 2018, Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs, 2019, p. II. 148 Ibid, p. 3. Region I is Headquartered in Chicago, Illinois; region II is in Dobbins ARB—Air Reserve Base, Marietta, Georgia; and region III is in Denver, Colorado. 149 Selective Service System, Congressional Budget Justification, FY2021,Arlington, VA, p. 17 150 Ibid. Reserve Force Officers (RFOs) are maintained at a maximum level of 175, which includes 150 funded and 25 unfunded. 151 For more information see https://www.sss.gov/About/Agency-Structure/Reserve-Forces-Officers. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 27 Funding Congress appropriates funds for the SSS through the Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act.152 For FY2020, Congress appropriated $27.1 million, an increase over the FY2019 appropriation of $26 million. The budget request for FY2021 was $26 million.153 In FY1977-FY1979, while the SSS was in “deep standby” mode, funding for the agency was between $6 million and $8 million in then-year dollars (approximately $26-$34 million in 2020 dollars).154 Currently, about 60% of the agency’s annual budget goes to personnel costs, including civilian pay and benefits and Military Reserve Officer support (see Table 3). 155 Table 3. Selective Service Agency Budget FY2019 Function Amount Civilian Pay & Benefits $13,576,941 Military Reserve Officer Support Services $1,526,327 Agency Services (Government & Commercial) $4,231,313 IT Software & Equipment $3,483,253 GSA Occupancy Agreement (OA), Other Rent, Lease, Storage, and Maintenance $835,700 Postage & Express Courier Services $797,883 Communications Services, Utilities, and Facilities Operations $425,428 Printing & Reproduction $407,070 General Supplies and Furniture $375,379 Training, Travel, and Transportation of Personnel $274,885 Strategic Initiatives $65,821 Total $26,000,000 Source: Selective Service System, Annual Report to the Congress of the United States: Fiscal Year 2019, Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs, 2019, p. 19. Data-Sharing and Data Management The agency maintains data for registrants until their 85th birthday at the Data Management Center in Palatine, IL; the center is authorized 48 full-time employees.156 The purpose of retaining the data for this length of time is to enable SSS to verify eligibility for registered males who apply for certain government employment or benefits. According to the SSS, this database had 78 million 152 See CRS Report R45295, Financial Services and General Government (FSGG) FY2019 Appropriations: Overview, by Baird Webel. 153 Selective Service System, FY2021 Congressional Budget Justification, February 2020, Arlington, VA. Available at https://www.sss.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/Congressional-Budget-Justification-FY2021.pdf 154 Office of Management and Budget, Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Years 1974 -1979. 155 The RFOs receive their drill pay from DOD and then DOD is reimbursed by the SSS. 156 https://www.sss.gov/About/Agency-Structure. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 28 records in FY2017 and grows by 2 million to 2.5 million records per year. 157 The information held in this database includes registrants’ full name, date of birth, street address, city, state, zip code, and Social Security number.158 In FY2018, recognizing the need for digital and mobile information, the SSS started collecting e-mail addresses and phone numbers.159 The SSS also maintains a “Suspected Violator Inventory System,” which includes data on non-registrants that the SSS has received through data-sharing agreements.160 The SSS uses information on this list to reach out to individuals and remind them of their obligation to register. Most of the registration and data-sharing is automated. The SSS both provides data to and receives data from other government agencies, including the Department of Labor, the Department of Education, the Department of State, USCIS, DOD, and the Alaska Permanent Fund. Information received from these agencies by the SSS is matched with existing data and if no record exists, one is created. On a monthly basis, SSS provides the Joint Advertising and Market Research Studies (JAMRS, part of DOD) new registrant names, addresses, and date of birth, and a file of individuals identified as deceased.161 These data are kept for three years by JAMRS and are used by DOD for recruiting purposes. Yearly, SSS provides the names, addresses, and Social Security numbers of individuals ages 18 through 25 to the U.S. Census Bureau for its intercensus estimate program. The Census Bureau keeps these data for two years. Annually, the SSS also sends DOJ a list of individuals who are required to register, but have failed to do so.162 Men are required to update the Selective Service within 10 days when their address changes until January 1 of the year that they turn 26 years old. Those who register at 18 years old are likely to move at least once, if not a number of times, before their 26th birthday. For example, a college-bound 18-year-old may move away from their parents’ home to university housing, then into an off-campus apartment, and into a new home after graduation. The SSS updates addresses in its database using information from other agencies and self-reported information from individuals. What are Some Options for the Future of the Selective Service System? Although Congress has amended the MSSA a number of times, some of its main tenets—the preservation of a peacetime selective service agency and a registration requirement—have remained much the same since the mid-20th century. The future of the Selective Service System is a concern for many in Congress. The registration requirements and associated penalties affect young men in every congressional district. Some see the preservation of the SSS as an important component of national security and emergency preparedness. Others suggest the MSSA is no longer necessary and should be 157 Selective Service System, Congressional Budget Justification, FY2017 , Arlington, VA. 158 An amendment to the MSSA by P.L. 97-86 authorized SSS to require registrants to furnish their Social Security account number. 159 Selective Service System, Annual Report to the Congress of the United States: Fiscal Year 2019, Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs, 2019. 160 Laura Seago, Automatic Registration in the United States: The Selective Service Example , Brennan Center for Justice, New York University School of Law, 2009, p. 9. 161 Information provided by the Selective Service System to CRS. 162 Information provided by the Selective Service System to CRS. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 29 repealed. Still others have suggested amendments to the MSSA to address issues of equity, efficiency, and cost. Arguments For and Against Repeal of MSSA Some form of selective service legislation has been in effect almost continuously since 1940. Repealing the MSSA and associated statute would dismantle the SSS agency infrastructure and would remove the registration requirement with its associated penalties. Efforts to repeal the Selective Service Act have been repeatedly introduced in Congress, and repeal is popular among certain advocacy groups and defense scholars.163 Those who would like to repeal the MSSA and disband the SSS question whether a draft mechanism is still necessary in the modern-day context. A return to the draft has been unpopular with a majority of the American public.164 Some argue that there is a low likelihood of the draft ever being reinstated. Even in the face of nearly two decades of conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan, DOD has maintained its ability to recruit and retain a professional volunteer force without resorting to conscription. The nature of warfare has shifted in such a way that the United States may not need to mobilize manpower at the rates seen in the 20th century. Even if such high mobilization rates were needed, some question whether the Armed Forces would have the capacity and infrastructure to rapidly absorb the large numbers of untrained personnel that a draft would provide.165 DOD has reported that the Military Entry Processing Command can process approximately 18,000 registrants per day. These new accessions would then be sent to training centers/duty stations as identified by the Office of the Secretary of Defense.166 Some analysts have suggested that a draft, if implemented, would be an inefficient use of labor, as it would “indiscriminately compel employment in the military regardless of an individual’s skills where that individual could have much greater value to our society elsewhere.”167 Others, including civil rights advocacy groups, contend that the registration requirement and conscription are an invasion of civil liberty. Those who advocate for maintaining the MSSA but suspending of all SSS activity contend that the SSS infrastructure and registrant databases could be reconstructed in due time if the need arose.168 In the short term, additional manpower needs might be augmented by Delayed Entry Program (DEP) participants, non-prior service reservists awaiting training, and other inactive reserve manpower.169 A reauthorization of the draft might also encourage volunteerism, as 163 See for example, S. 3041 (114th Congress) Muhammad Ali Voluntary Service Act, and H.R. 4523 (114th Congress) To repeal the Military Selective Service Act, and thereby terminate the registration requirements of such Act and eliminate civilian local boards, civilian appeal boards, and similar local agencies of the Selective Service System. 164 2013 polling data suggest that 65% of Americans are opposed to reinstating the draft (with 28% in favor and 8% don’t know). Quinnipiac University Poll, February 7, 2013. Prior polls in the past 2 decades have also shown similar or higher rates of opposition, see Gallup, Military and National Defense, at https://news.gallup.com/poll/1666/military-national-defense.aspx 165 LA Times Editorial Board, \"Draft registry for women? How about for no one?\" Los Angeles Times, February 16, 2016. 166 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, Report on the Purpose and Utility of a Registration System for Military Selective Service, July 2017, p. 24. 167 Benjamin W. Powell, Time to Abolish Selective Service, Independent Institute, January 7, 2016. 168 Bernard Rostker, “What to Do with the Selective Service System? Historical Lessons and Future Post ure,” Santa Monica, RAND Corporation, 2018, http://www.rand.org/pubs/perspectives/PE197.html. 169 Doug Bandow, Draft Registration: It's Time to Repeal Carter's Final Legacy, Cato Institute, Policy Analysis No. 86, May 7, 1987, http://www.cato.org/pubs/pas/pa086.html. Inactive reserve strength would include Individual Ready The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 30 choosing a branch of service and occupational specialty might be more preferable to the possibility of being drafted into a less favorable branch and occupation. This might have the potential to provide adequate volunteer manpower until the SSS mechanisms could be fully re-established. Others are skeptical that a post-mobilization registration system could be quickly established in a time of national crisis.170 Proponents of maintaining the SSS and registration requirement often cite a few key arguments. First, at approximately $26 million per year, some have argued that it provides a “low-cost insurance policy” against potential future threats that may require national mobilization beyond what could be supported by the all-volunteer force. Second, adversaries of the United States could see the disbanding of the SSS as a potential weakness, thus emboldening existing or potential enemies. Third, the registration requirement is important to maintain connections between the all-volunteer force and civil society by creating an awareness of the military and the duty to serve in time of crisis among the nation’s youth. The National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service (henceforth “the 2020 Commission), found little evidence that the maintenance of the SSS either deters potential adversaries or helps forge connections between American citizens and the military. However, the 2020 Commission recommended maintaining the SSS and mandatory registration as a draft contingency mechanism, stating After extensive review, the Commission reaffirms the need to maintain a contingency for mandatory military service in order to draw on the talents, skills, and abilities of Americans in the event of a national emergency, and to clarify the purpose of that system in law. The Selective Service is an essential component of the Nation's military preparedness.171 Other Legislative Options and Considerations Some of the options for amending the MSSA include the following:  Repealing the registration requirement (with or without maintaining the SSS as an agency),  Transferring SSS functions to an existing federal agency,  Removing or modifying penalties for failure to register,  Requiring women to register,  Enhancing SSS data collection for the acquisition of critical skills, and  Strengthening ability to respond to a national mobilization. Repealing the Peacetime Registration Requirement Congress could repeal the registration requirement and terminate the existing penalties for failing to register.172 Removing the registration requirement and the need to verify registration would Reserves, Standby Reserves, and Retired Reserves. The Individual Ready Reserve is composed of former active duty and reserve military personnel and is authorized under Chapter 1005 of T itle 10 United States Code. 170 National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service, Inspired to Serve, Final Report, March 2020. 171 Dr. Kori Schake, Deputy Director General, International Institute for Strategic Studies, Statement for the Record to the National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service, May 15, 2019, https://www.inspire2serve.gov/_api/files/276. 172 50 U.S.C. §3802 and 50 U.S.C. §3811. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 31 reduce the activities of the SSS. In this instance, the agency’s functions would likely be limited to historical record preservation and maintenance of standby plans and volunteer rolls. Some have proposed that if registrant data were needed for a future draft, they might be acquired through existing federal or state government databases. The current SSS database relies heavily on information collected by other federal and state entities for initial inputs, updates, and verification of registrants’ address information. However, this data sharing is enabled by existing statutes and agency agreements that if repealed or allowed to lapse might require time and effort to reconstitute. The use of existing government or even commercial databases to develop a list of draft-eligible youth also raises concerns about a fair and equitable draft, as these lists might also exclude some draft-eligible individuals.173 In the case of a national emergency, Congress could enact a new statutory requirement for draft registration, and reconstitute the SSS (if it had been dissolved). A 1997 GAO study found that the time needed to raise the necessary infrastructure might be insufficient to respond to urgent DOD requirements.174 There may be other challenges in enforcing a new registration requirement in a time of national need. Currently, compliance rates for registration are relatively high, but the probability of implementing a draft is considered to be low. If the government tried to reintroduce a registration requirement during a time when conscription were more likely, compliance rates could fall and it might be more difficult to build up a database of eligible individuals. On the other hand, when the registration requirement was reinstated in 1980, the SSS reported 95% compliance rates within four months.175 The 2020 Commission recommend maintaining the pre-mobilization registration system and the SSS infrastructure, based on estimates that it would take 830 to 920 days to bring the SSS out of standby mode and deliver the first inductees.176 If the SSS was maintained and only the registration requirement was repealed, the SSS estimates it would take one year from congressional authorization to deliver the first inductee.177 Transferring SSS Functions to an Existing Federal Agency Current law states, “the Selective Service System should remain administratively independent of any other agency, including the Department of Defense.”178 Nevertheless, Congress could amend the MSSA to transfer its functions to an existing federal agency. Such a transfer might take into account not only the SSS’s value as a unique data center, but also the staff who comprise the agency at many levels, who would be needed in case of an actual draft. As described previously, this staffing includes regional directors and a pool of civilian volunteers that would serve on local draft boards. This responsibility for maintaining volunteer rolls and 173 In 1978 the Congressional Budget Office proposed automatic registration of eligible persons by merging existing data on file with the Social Security System and Internal Revenue Service (IRS).173 The report’s authors suggested, however, that such a list might miss as many as 40% of eligible registrants and thus raise issues of inequity. IRS officials were also concerned that such an approach would also raise the rates of tax evasion from those seeking to avoid draft registration. 174 U.S. General Accounting Office, Selective Service: Cost and Implications of Two Alternatives to the Present System , NSAID-97-225, September 1997. 175 Selective Service System, Semiannual Report of the Director of Selective Service, Together with A Report on the 1980 National Selective Service Registration, January 30, 1981, 1983, Table 4, p. 13. 176 National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service, Inspired to Serve, Final Report, March 2020. 177 Ibid. 178 50 U.S.C. §3801(f). The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 32 training could also be transferred to an existing federal agency, potentially the Department of Defense, and the capability could be augmented with military reserve manpower (as is currently done). The statutory independence of the SSS with respect to DOD and the presence of local civilian boards have historically been viewed as important to the public’s perception of a fair and equitable draft. To address this concern, some have proposed that administrative responsibilities could be transferred to DOD while the draft is inactive with the option of transferring all functions back to an independent agency if draft authority were reinstated.179 Another option might be to transfer the agency and/or its functions to the Department of Homeland Security. There are potential synergies between the SSS and other DHS agencies that would play an active role in a time of national emergency.180 At least one agency under DHS (USCIS) already has a role in data sharing with the SSS.181 Some suggest that suspension or transfer of SSS operations could deliver some federal budget savings. In 2012, as mandated by Congress, the GAO compared the potential costs and savings of operating in a “deep standby” mode versus active registration.182 According to the report, the SSS estimated that operating in a deep standby mode would provide approximately $5 million in savings in the first year with recurring savings of $6.6 million annually. This would be a reduction of about 25% of the current budget. The transfer of SSS functions to an existing agency might have some initial implementation costs but could potentially reduce some of the overhead costs of maintaining an independent agency.183 Amending or Repealing the Penalties for Failing to Register Some argue that Congress should amend the MSSA and associated statute to remove penalties for failing to register, particularly since only men are subject to the requirements. They argue that ineligibility for federal benefits is most harmful to those with fewer financial resources who also might be least aware of their obligation to register. Nevertheless, weakening or removing penalties could affect registration compliance rates. Alternatively, Congress could amend the penalties to limit the amount of time that one is ineligible for federal benefits following failure to register. For example, under current law, the statute of limitations for criminal penalties is five years following the individual’s 26th birthday or fraudulent registration. The MSSA could be amended to sunset ineligibility after a certain time period, or to reinstate eligibility for federal benefits through some other form of public service. The 2020 Commission recommended a 30-day grace period for an individual to register 179 In 1975, the Office of Management and Budget proposed this possibility for the agency in a “deep standby” mode. James T . Lynn, The Selective Service System: Draft of 10/17/75, Washington D.C.: Office of Management and Budget, 1975. 180 Agencies under DHS include the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), U.S. Coast Guard. U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, U.S. Secret Service, and the Transportation Security Administration. 181 USCIS assists with the registration process by transmitting the appropriate data to the Selective Service System (SSS) for male applicants between the ages of 18 and 26 who apply for adjustment of status. See USCIS Policy Manual, Chapter 7, at https://www.uscis.gov/policy-manual/volume-12-part-d-chapter-7. 182 P.L. 112-81. U.S. Government Accountability Office, DOD Should Reevaluate Requirements for the Selective Service System , GAO-12-623, June 2012. 183 U.S. Government Accountability Office, DOD Should Reevaluate Requirements for the Selective Service System , GAO-12-623, June 2012. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 33 following the denial of a federal benefit, regardless of age at the time of applying for the benefit.184 Changing Registration Requirements to Include Women Women in the United States have never been required to register for the draft; however, DOD policy changes in 2015 that opened all military occupational specialties (MOSs) including ground combat positions to women have called into question the Selective Service exemption for women.185 Public opinion on this issue is split, with several polls indicating that approximately 50% of Americans support including women, with 35%-46% opposed.186 In 2016, several senior DOD leaders made personal statements in favor of registering women for the draft.187 The Trump Administration has not announced a formal position. Some have argued that in the case of national need, it would be unwise to exclude 50% of the population from draft eligibility, as drawing from a broader pool of draftees could help meet both quantity and quality targets . In a February 2019 decision, the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Texas granted a summary judgment declaring the male-only registration requirement was unconstitutional; however, the court did not grant injunctive relief blocking the government’s current male-only registration policy because the plaintiffs’ summary judgment motion seeking declaratory relief did not request it.188 As such, the male-only registration policy remains in place. The plaintiffs in this case, the National Coalition for Men and two men of registration age, argue that requiring only men to register constitutes sex discrimination in violation of the Fifth Amendment’s equal protection clause.189 The February 2019 decision was appealed in the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, and oral arguments were held on March 3, 2020.190 The federal government argued that the court should wait to make a decision until the results of the National Commission on Military National and Public Service study were released.191 Some women have also pushed for female registration, arguing that women cannot be equal in society as long as they are barred from full participation in all levels of the national security system and thus should be allowed to register for Selective Service.192 The 2020 Commission 184 National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service, Inspired to Serve, Final Report, March 2020. 185 U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Armed Services, Implementation of the Decision to Open All Ground Combat Units to Women, 114th Cong., 2nd sess., February 2, 2016 (Washington: GPO, 2016). For more information on the expansion of combat roles to woman, see CRS Report R42075, Women in Combat: Issues for Congress, by Kristy N. Kamarck and CRS Report R44321, Diversity, Inclusion, and Equal Opportunity in the Armed Services: Background and Issues for Congress, by Kristy N. Kamarck. 186 Polling results from five recent polls as presented in National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service, Inspired to Serve, Final Report, March 2020, Figure 13, https://inspire2serve.gov/reports/final-report. 187 For example, when questioned in a February 2016 hearing, the Commandant of the Marine Corps, General Robert B. Neller, and Army Chief of Staff, General Mark Milley, expressed support for draft registration for women. U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Armed Services, Implementation of the Decision to Open All Ground Combat Units to Women, 114th Cong., 2nd sess., February 2, 2016 (Washington: GPO, 2016). The Obama Administration did not take an official position on whether to register women form the draft. Hunter, Melanie, \"Marine Commandant, Army Chief of Staff Agree: Women Should Register for Draft,\" cnsnews.com , February 2, 2016. 188 National Coalition for Men, et al. v. Selective Service System , (U.S. District Court, Southern District of Texas, Houston Division, 2019). 189 Ibid. 190 Patricia Kime, \"Appeals court weighs constitutionality of excluding women from the draft,\" MilitaryTimes, March 3, 2020. 191 Ibid. 192 In July 2015 a teenage girl from New Jersey brought a federal class action suit against the Selective Service The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 34 heard from some current female servicemembers that “disparate treatment with respect to registration was yet another way in which the Government signaled that their contributions and sacrifices were not as valued as those of their male colleagues.”193 Others believe that equal access to combat jobs should oblige women to take equal responsibility for registering for Selective Service and potential assignments to combat roles should the draft be reinstated.194 Still others suggest that women should be obliged to register but should not be forced into combat roles in the occasion of a draft.195 Any exemptions for women would raise fairness concerns for men, who would not have the same opportunities to opt out of combat assignments. Making the choice not to serve in combat available to both men and women might make it difficult for the services to function, especially in the event of war or national emergency. Those who are opposed to a requirement for women to register suggest that it is not fair and equitable for women to be placed in the same roles as men. They argue that the average woman does not have the same physical capabilities as the average man and thus would have higher rates of injury and a lower probability of survival if forced to serve in direct ground combat roles.196 Physiological studies have found that the average man has greater muscle mass, upper- and lower-body strength, and speed than the average women.197 Military studies have also found higher injury rates among women – particularly when engaging in heavy load-bearing activities.198 Other studies have suggested that physiological differences associated with metabolic rates may give women an advantage in endurance activities.199 Opponents of drafting women have also contended that it would be militarily inefficient to draft thousands of women when only a small percentage would be physically qualified to serve in direct ground combat roles.200 Some have countered that the physical standards for assignment to combat roles in the AVF are tied to combat tasks, gender-neutral, and unlikely to be lowered in the instance of draft mobilization, ensuring that the cadre of men and women would be assigned to those roles at rates proportional to their ability to meet those physical standards.201 Moreover, physical standards are claiming the refusal to allow women to register is discriminatory now that women are eligible for combat roles. 193 National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service, Inspired to Serve, Final Report, March 2020, https://inspire2serve.gov/reports/final-report. 194 David Barno and Nora Bensahel, \"Now Women Should Register for the Draft,\" Time, December 7, 2015. 195 Nicole Lafond, \"Poll: Most Women Believe They Should Not Be Forced Into Combat,\" The Daily Caller, February 7, 2013. 196 June Eden, \"Thanks, Ashton - Women Now Subject to Involuntary Assignment to Combat Units, Selective Service,\" Breitbart Texas, December 10, 2015. 197 Ian Janssen et al., \"Skeletal muscle mass and distribution in 468 men and women aged 18 –88 yr,\" Journal of Applied Physiology, July 1, 2000. 198 Dan Lamothe, \"Marine experiment finds women get injured more frequently, shoot less accurately than men,\" Washington Post, September 10, 2015. 199 S.L. Carter, C. Rennie, and M.A. Tarnopolsky, \"Substrate utilization during endurance exercise in men and women after endurance training,\" American Journal of Physiology; Endocrinology and Metabolism , June 2001. Simon Usborne, \"Why women are outperforming men at the extremes of endurance,\" Financial Times, January 22, 2019. 200 Charlie Dunlap, \"Register Women for the Draft? Not So Fast,\" Lawfire, January 30, 2016. 201 When registering women for the draft was considered in the early 1980s, some raised equity concerns about draft calls since combat positions were closed to women, therefore, men and women would not likely be drafted in equal numbers. Proponents of registering women asserted that conscription would be based on military personnel needs and men and women would serve “in proportion to the ability of the Armed Forces to use them effectively.” U.S. Congress, House Committee on Armed Services, Presidential Recommendations for Selective Service Reform , committee print, 96th Cong., 2nd sess., February 11, 1980 (Washington: GPO, 1980). Micah Ables, Women Aren't the Problem, The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 35 not the only standards to be met for service in the Armed Forces. Prospective recruits must also meet certain educational, aptitude, and medical standards and there are restrictions on prior drug use or criminal offenses.202 The 2020 Commission noted that while the number of young people eligible for military service under current standards has been shrinking, data from DOD indicate that young women are equally as likely to qualify for service under these standards as men. 203 In addition, the nature of warfare has changed in such a way that units nominally designated as “noncombat” have nevertheless been engaged by enemy forces – blurring the distinction between combat and noncombat troops.204 At the same time, future wars may have requirements for other skills in noncombat fields where the percentage of individuals qualified would not be as variable by gender. Historically, conscription has been used to fill both combat and noncombat roles, and nearly 80% of today’s military specialties are designated as non-combat.205 Others who are opposed to the potential draft of women believe that women hold a special and unique position in society due to their roles as wives, mothers, caregivers, and nurturers.206 As stated in the 2020 Commission report, For some, women's unique biological distinction—their ability to conceive and bear children—is an immutable difference that justifies differential treatment and raises the concern that military service may adversely affect the fertility of female service members. These individuals argue that service through a draft would interfere with or deny many women the ability to embrace the vocation of motherhood.207 Certain religious organizations believe it is wrong for women to serve in combat roles, or for the government to coerce women into military service.208 In addition, some polling data suggest that if women were required to register for the draft, it would significantly increase public opposition to reinstating the draft and could affect public support for engaging in any conflict that has the potential to escalate beyond the capability of the all-volunteer force.209 A requirement for young Standards Are, Modern War Institute, February 5, 2019, https://mwi.usma.edu/women-arent-problem-standards/. 202 For more on enlistment standards, see CRS Report WPD00017, Understanding Constituent Issues: Enlisting in the Armed Forces, by Lawrence Kapp and Alan Ott . 203 National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service, Inspired to Serve, Final Report, March 2020, https://inspire2serve.gov/reports/final-report, p 115. 204 For example, in 2005 the Army started moving towards a “Modular Redesign” for rotation, training, and readiness reasons. Under this concept, the Brigade Combat Teams (BCTs) served as the basic large tactical combat unit of the Army. These BCTs were supported by Multi-Functional Support Brigades. These support brigades were often collocated with the BCTs and included noncombat personnel, many of whom were women. As a consequence, non-combat designated personnel were often exposed to combat action. 205 National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service, Inspired to Serve, Final Report, March 2020, https://inspire2serve.gov/reports/final-report, p. 116. 206 Ibid, p. 120. 207 Ibid. 208 For example, the Southern Baptist Convention (SBC) issued a resolution on the registration requirement for women that argues, “requiring women to register for the Selective Service alongside men would be to treat men and women interchangeably and to deny male and female differences clearly revealed in Scripture and in nature […] the messengers to the Southern Baptist Convention meeting in Birmingham, Alabama, June 11 –12, 2019, strongly urge the President and Congress not to expand the Selective Service to include women.” SBC Annual Meeting Resolutions, at http://www.sbcannualmeeting.net/sbc19/resolutions#2309. 209 Some polling data suggest that if the military draft was reinstated, 52% of Americans would be in favor of drafting women as well as men. Thirty six percent of men and 48% of women were opposed to drafting women. Quinnipiac University Poll, February 7, 2013. Public opinion on this matter has remained about the same since 1980, when draft registration requirements were reinstated. At that time, 50% of Americans were in favor of requiring women to participate in a draft should it become necessary. A 2011 study reported survey results that found that instituting a draft The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 36 women to register may have some benefits for DOD in terms of military recruiting. The address data collected by the Selective Service System and shared with DOD currently enhances recruiters’ ability to identify potential enlistees and distribute marketing materials to registered young men by mail. DOD estimates that marketing materials included with SSS registration confirmation mailing—or joint leads—generate between 75,000-80,000 male recruiting prospects annually.210 DOD, through JAMRS, purchases similar databases for information about enlistment-eligible women. Although most registrations are now completed automatically through other interactions with the federal or state government, some contend that the very act of registering would make young women more aware of their citizenship duties, thus broadening the percentage of qualified women considering a career in the military. In March 2020, the National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service recommended extending draft registration to women, stating Doing so promotes the national security of the United States by allowing the President to leverage the full range of talent and skills available during a national mobilization. It also reaffirms the Nation's fundamental belief in a common defense, and signals that both men and women are valued for their contributions in defending the Nation. The current disparate treatment of women unacceptably excludes women from a fundamental civic obligation and reinforces gender stereotypes about the role of women, undermining national security.211 Including women in the registration process may require some additional budget resources for the SSS due to increased administrative processing and public awareness needs. Currently there are about 11 million women ages 18-26 who would be eligible to register under the statutory age requirement.212 The SSS has estimated that to expand registration requirements for women it would need an additional $16 million in funding for the first year of registering women and a total of $59 million over a 5-year period to implement the policy change .213 Enhanced SSS Data Collection for the Acquisition of Critical Skills As previously discussed, some have suggested that the future threats that the United States may face may require rapid mobilization of those with specialized skills and experience (e.g., cyber, space, healthcare).214 The MSSA appears to acknowledge that a national mobilization may require other critical manpower beyond combat troops, stating, significantly reduced the public's support for war: “moving from an all-volunteer to a conscript army decreases support by 17% (from 54% to 37%).” Horowitz, Michael C. and Matthew S. Levendusky, \"Drafting Support for War: Conscription and Mass,\" The Journal of Politics, vol. 73, no. 2 (April 2011). 210 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, Report on the Purpose and Utility of a Registration System for Military Selective Service, July 2017, p. 11. 211 National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service, Inspired to Serve, Final Report, March 2020, https://inspire2serve.gov/reports/final-report, p. 115. 212 Based on 2010 U.S. Census figures and projections. 213 National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service, Inspired to Serve, Final Report, March 2020, https://inspire2serve.gov/reports/final-report. Prior estimates by the SSS were $8.5 million additional funds in the first year and slightly less in the following years. In the first year the SSS would need to conduct a “catch -up” registration for the entire 18 to 26 year old cohort, while in subsequent years the bulk of the new registrations would be those turning 18 in that year. Schmidt, Michael S., \"Draft Registration for Women Would Stir a Sleepy Government Agency,\" February 7, 2016. 214 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, Report on the Purpose and Utility of a Registration System for Military Selective Service, July 2017, p. 25. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 37 The Congress further declares that adequate provision for national security requires maximum effort in the fields of scientific research and development, and the fullest possible utilization of the Nation's technological, scientific, and other critical manpower resources.215 One option for Congress would be to require the SSS to implement an enhanced registration system that includes listing certain degrees, licenses, or certifications. This could potentially allow rapid acquisition of personnel with necessary expertise through a targeted draft. This type of data collection could also be used to solicit volunteers with requisite expertise prior to activating induction authorities. Should a draft ever be reinstated, available information on individual qualifications could also shorten the timeline needed to train personnel in certain specialties and could support more efficient alternative service placements for those who are conscientious objectors. The challenges with pursuing this option for the SSS would be increased administration costs to maintain, update, and enforce reporting for such a database. In addition, some may oppose such a proposal due to fairness, privacy or civil liberty concerns. Consideration of Skill-Matching in Conscription and Alternative Service; Examples from Norway and Israel One example of a modern-day peacetime registration and conscription system can be found in Norway. Norway has an active duty military force size of 23,550 (out of a total population of about 5 million).216 All Norwegian citizens in a conscription cohort (men and women, age 17) are required to fill out an online questionnaire that helps to determine their relevant skills, eligibility for, and interest in military service. Based on the results of this questionnaire, the armed forces calls in about 22,000 individuals to “Session Part 2” to determine fitness for service through physical and psychological tests. Selection boards choose individuals for a mandatory 12-month service obligation based on the armed forces’ needs for various skills. About 9,000 total men and women are eventually conscripted.217 Israeli is another country where all citizens (men and women) over the age of 18 are liable for conscription into the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF). Some exemptions are granted to Arab citizens of Israel, and to other citizens for religious, physical or psychological reasons. There is an alternative service option called Sherut Leumi for a period of 12 to 24 months.218 A number of women opt to serve in Sherut Leumi every year on religious grounds. Men who request an exemption from the Army may do Sherut Leumi in lieu of military service. The options for service under this program include work with hospitals, nursing homes, education, disadvantaged communities, immigrant assistance, environmentalism, and other non-profit organizations. Placement organizations conduct interviews to match youth with jobs based on individual skills and interests. The SSS currently has a standby plan, the Health Care Professional Delivery System (HCPDS), that would initiate a post-mobilization draft of individuals with certain critical health specialties in the case of a national emergency.219 The 2020 Commission noted that the HCPDS model would be difficult to apply to other career fields, like cyber, that do not have clearly defined licensing and certification requirements.220 The 2020 Commission offered some additional alternatives to acquire critical skills including, 215 50 U.S.C. §3801(e). 216 To put this in context, the United States with a population of about 323 million has approximately 1.3 million active duty servicemembers and recruits about 200,000 new active duty and reservists every year. 217 https://www.regjeringen.no/en/aktuelt/A-bill-introducing-compulsory-military-service-for-women/id763120/ 218 http://www.nbn.org.il/sherut -leumi-national-service/. 219 P.L. 100-180 §715, codified in 50 U.S.C. §3809. 220 National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service, Inspired to Serve, Final Report, March 2020, https://inspire2serve.gov/reports/final-report, pp. 103-104. The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 38  Extending the upper age limit of registration to 35 years to capture those with skills and experience that can only be gained through longer periods of education and training;  Creating a Critical Skills Individual Ready Reserve with incentives for non-prior servicemembers and those separating from active or reserve service to remain available in times of emergency; and  Creating a national volunteer roster of skilled personnel who are willing to serve in a national emergency.221 Regardless of the approach taken, the 2020 Commission also recommended that Congress require the Secretary of Defense to generate and maintain a list of the type and number of currently needed critically skilled personnel. Strengthening Ability to Respond to a National Mobilization The 2020 Commission made several other recommendations to modernize the SSS and to prepare it for future national emergencies. One of these recommendations is to require regular, periodic exercises of military draft mobilization processes. The commission noted that “since 1980, no significant tests of the system have been undertaken to assess whether it [the SSS] can fulfill its mission during an emergency.” In his testimony to the Commission, the Director of the Selective Service System noted that the agency recently conducted mobilization exercises for the first time in several years. The commission’s draft legislative proposal would require such an exercise every five years and would involve the SSS, the DHS, Department of Commerce, Department of Labor, and other relevant interagency stakeholders.222 Another finding of the commission was that DOD is structurally unprepared “to efficiently and effectively integrate conscripts into the total force” due to outdated personnel requirements and timelines and a lack of central authority for managing such requirements. 223 The commission recommended that Congress require the Secretary of Defense to designate an executive agent within the Office of the Secretary of Defense to lead the DOD’s mobilization planning effort in coordination with the SSS. 221 Ibid, p. 103. 222 National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service, Inspired to Serve, Final Report, Legislative Annex, March 2020, https://inspire2serve.gov/sites/default/files/final-report/Legislative%20Annex.pdf. p. 172. 223 The commission found that personnel requirements and the timeline for inducting draftees in the event of an emergency requiring mass mobilization had not been updated since 1994. National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service, Inspired to Serve, Final Report, March 2020, https://inspire2serve.gov/reports/final-report . The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 39 Appendix. Acronyms Table A-1. Acronyms Acronym Description AVF All Volunteer Force DHS Department of Homeland Security DOD Department of Defense DOJ Department of Justice ED Department of Education FY Fiscal Year GAO General Accounting Office (pre-2004) or Government Accountability Office HCPDS Health Care Personnel Delivery System GS General Schedule INS Immigration and Nationalization Service JAMRS Joint Advertising Market Research and Studies MEPS Military Entry Processing Station MOS Military Occupational Specialty MSSA Military Selective Service Act NDAA National Defense Authorization Act RFO Reserve Force Office SSS Selective Service System UMT Universal Military Training USCIS United States Citizenship and Immigration Service WWI World War I WWII World War II Author Information Kristy N. Kamarck Analyst in Military Manpower The Selective Service System and Draft Registration: Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service R44452 · VERSION 13 · UPDATED 40 Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 		2020-05-01T14:49:29-0400
U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas: Background and Issues for Congress U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas: Background and Issues for Congress Updated May 1, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov R42784 U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service Summary In an international security environment described as one of renewed great power competition, the South China Sea (SCS) has emerged as an arena of U.S.-China strategic competition. U.S.-China strategic competition in the SCS forms an element of the Trump Administration’s more confrontational overall approach toward China, and of the Administration’s efforts for promoting its construct for the Indo-Pacific region, called the Free and Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP). China’s actions in the SCS in recent years—including extensive island-building and base-construction activities at sites that it occupies in the Spratly Islands, as well as actions by its maritime forces to assert China’s claims against competing claims by regional neighbors such as the Philippines and Vietnam—have heightened concerns among U.S. observers that China is gaining effective control of the SCS, an area of strategic, political, and economic importance to the United States and its allies and partners. Actions by China’s maritime forces at the Japan-administered Senkaku Islands in the East China Sea (ECS) are another concern for U.S. observers. Chinese domination of China’s near-seas region—meaning the SCS and ECS, along with the Yellow Sea—could substantially affect U.S. strategic, political, and economic interests in the Indo-Pacific region and elsewhere. Potential general U.S. goals for U.S.-China strategic competition in the SCS and ECS include but are not necessarily limited to the following: fulfilling U.S. security commitments in the Western Pacific, including treaty commitments to Japan and the Philippines; maintaining and enhancing the U.S.-led security architecture in the Western Pacific, including U.S. security relationships with treaty allies and partner states; maintaining a regional balance of power favorable to the United States and its allies and partners; defending the principle of peaceful resolution of disputes and resisting the emergence of an alternative “might-makes-right” approach to international affairs; defending the principle of freedom of the seas, also sometimes called freedom of navigation; preventing China from becoming a regional hegemon in East Asia; and pursing these goals as part of a larger U.S. strategy for competing strategically and managing relations with China. Potential specific U.S. goals for U.S.-China strategic competition in the SCS and ECS include but are not necessarily limited to the following: dissuading China from carrying out additional base-construction activities in the SCS, moving additional military personnel, equipment, and supplies to bases at sites that it occupies in the SCS, initiating island-building or base-construction activities at Scarborough Shoal in the SCS, declaring straight baselines around land features it claims in the SCS, or declaring an air defense identification zone (ADIZ) over the SCS; and encouraging China to reduce or end operations by its maritime forces at the Senkaku Islands in the ECS, halt actions intended to put pressure against Philippine-occupied sites in the Spratly Islands, provide greater access by Philippine fisherman to waters surrounding Scarborough Shoal or in the Spratly Islands, adopt the U.S./Western definition regarding freedom of the seas, and accept and abide by the July 2016 tribunal award in the SCS arbitration case involving the Philippines and China. The Trump Administration has taken various actions for competing strategically with China in the SCS and ECS. The issue for Congress is whether the Trump Administration’s strategy for competing strategically with China in the SCS and ECS is appropriate and correctly resourced, and whether Congress should approve, reject, or modify the strategy, the level of resources for implementing it, or both.U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Background ..................................................................................................................................... 1 U.S. Interests in SCS and ECS .................................................................................................. 1 U.S. Regional Allies and Partners, and U.S. Regional Security Architecture ..................... 2 Principle of Nonuse of Force or Coercion .......................................................................... 3 Principle of Freedom of the Seas ........................................................................................ 3 Trade Routes and Hydrocarbons ......................................................................................... 5 Interpreting China’s Role as a Major World Power ............................................................ 6 U.S.-China Relations in General ......................................................................................... 6 Maritime Territorial and EEZ Disputes Involving China .......................................................... 6 Maritime Territorial Disputes .............................................................................................. 7 EEZ Dispute ........................................................................................................................ 7 Relationship of Maritime Territorial Disputes to EEZ Dispute .......................................... 7 China’s Approach to the SCS and ECS ..................................................................................... 8 In General ........................................................................................................................... 8 “Salami-Slicing” Strategy and Gray Zone Operations........................................................ 8 Island Building and Base Construction ............................................................................... 9 Other Chinese Actions That Have Heightened Concerns ................................................. 10 Use of Coast Guard Ships and Maritime Militia ............................................................... 10 Apparent Narrow Definition of “Freedom of Navigation” ................................................ 11 Position Regarding Regulation of Military Forces in EEZs .............................................. 11 Depiction of United States as Outsider Seeking to “Stir Up Trouble” .............................. 11 Assessments of China’s Strengthening Position in SCS .......................................................... 11 U.S. Position on Regarding Issues Relating to SCS and ECS ................................................ 12 Some Key Elements .......................................................................................................... 12 Freedom of Navigation (FON) Program ........................................................................... 15 Issues for Congress ........................................................................................................................ 15 Strategy for Competing Strategically with China in SCS and ECS ........................................ 15 Overview ........................................................................................................................... 15 Potential U.S. Goals in a Strategic Competition ............................................................... 16 Some Additional Considerations Regarding Strategic Competition ................................. 17 Trump Administration’s Strategy for Competing Strategically ........................................ 20 Assessing the Trump Administration’s Strategy ............................................................... 24 Risk of United States Being Drawn into a Crisis or Conflict .................................................. 25 Whether United States Should Ratify UNCLOS .................................................................... 26 Legislative Activity in 2019 .......................................................................................................... 28 FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 2500/S. 1790) ........................................ 28 House ................................................................................................................................ 28 Conference ........................................................................................................................ 31 South China Sea and East China Sea Sanctions Act of 2019 (H.R. 3508/S. 1634) ................ 36 House ................................................................................................................................ 36 Senate ................................................................................................................................ 36 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Act of 2019 (S. 987) .......................................... 36 Senate ................................................................................................................................ 36 U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service Figures Figure A-1. Maritime Territorial Disputes Involving China .......................................................... 38 Figure A-2. Locations of 2001, 2002, and 2009 U.S.-Chinese Incidents at Sea and In Air .......... 41 Figure E-1. Map of the Nine-Dash Line ........................................................................................ 73 Figure E-2. EEZs Overlapping Zone Enclosed by Map of Nine-Dash Line ................................. 74 Figure G-1. EEZs in South China Sea and East China Sea ........................................................... 89 Figure G-2. Claimable World EEZs .............................................................................................. 90 Tables Table 1. China’s Apparent Goals and Supporting Actions for South China Sea ............................. 9 Table 2. Reported FON Operations in SCS During Trump Administration .................................. 23 Table 3. Reported Numbers of U.S. Navy SCS FONOPs and Taiwan Strait Transits................... 24 Appendixes Appendix A. Maritime Territorial and EEZ Disputes in SCS and ECS ........................................ 37 Appendix B. U.S. Security Treaties with Japan and Philippines ................................................... 45 Appendix C. Treaties and Agreements Related to the Maritime Disputes .................................... 47 Appendix D. July 2016 Tribunal Award in SCS Arbitration Case Involving Philippines and China.................................................................................................................................... 57 Appendix E. China’s Approach to Maritime Disputes in SCS and ECS ....................................... 64 Appendix F. Assessments of China’s Strengthening Position in SCS ........................................... 77 Appendix G. U.S. Position on Operational Rights in EEZs .......................................................... 87 Appendix H. U.S. Freedom of Navigation (FON) Program .......................................................... 94 Appendix I. Proposals for Modifying U.S. Strategy ................................................................... 100 Contacts Author Information ...................................................................................................................... 103 U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction This report provides background information and issues for Congress regarding U.S.-China strategic competition in the South China Sea (SCS) and East China Sea (ECS). In an international security environment described as one of renewed great power competition,1 the South China Sea (SCS) has emerged as an arena of U.S.-China strategic competition. U.S.-China strategic competition in the SCS forms an element of the Trump Administration’s more confrontational overall approach toward China, and of the Administration’s efforts for promoting its construct for the Indo-Pacific region, called the Free and Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP).2 China’s actions in the SCS in recent years have heightened concerns among U.S. observers that China is gaining effective control of the SCS, an area of strategic, political, and economic importance to the United States and its allies and partners. Actions by China’s maritime forces at the Japan-administered Senkaku Islands in the East China Sea (ECS) are another concern for U.S. observers. Chinese domination of China’s near-seas region3 could substantially affect U.S. strategic, political, and economic interests in the Indo-Pacific region and elsewhere. The issue for Congress is whether the Trump Administration’s strategy for competing strategically with China in the SCS and ECS is appropriate and correctly resourced, and whether Congress should approve, reject, or modify the strategy, the level of resources for implementing it, or both. Decisions that Congress makes on these issues could substantially affect U.S. strategic, political, and economic interests in the Indo-Pacific region and elsewhere. For a brief overview of maritime territorial disputes in the SCS and ECS that involve China, see “Maritime Territorial Disputes,” below, and Appendix A. Other CRS reports provide additional and more detailed information on these disputes.4 Background U.S. Interests in SCS and ECS Although disputes in the SCS and ECS involving China and its neighbors may appear at first glance to be disputes between faraway countries over a few rocks and reefs in the ocean that are of seemingly little importance to the United States, the SCS and ECS can engage U.S. interests for a variety of strategic, political, and economic reasons, including but not necessarily limited to those discussed in the sections below. 1 For additional discussion of renewed great power competition, see CRS Report R43838, Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 2 For more on the FOIP, see CRS Report R45396, The Trump Administration’s “Free and Open Indo-Pacific”: Issues for Congress, coordinated by Bruce Vaughn. 3 In this report, the term near-seas region refers to the SCS and ECS, along with the Yellow Sea. 4 See CRS In Focus IF10607, South China Sea Disputes: Background and U.S. Policy, by Ben Dolven, Susan V. Lawrence, and Ronald O'Rourke; CRS Report R42930, Maritime Territorial Disputes in East Asia: Issues for Congress, by Ben Dolven, Mark E. Manyin, and Shirley A. Kan; CRS Report R44072, Chinese Land Reclamation in the South China Sea: Implications and Policy Options, by Ben Dolven et al.; CRS Report R43894, China's Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ), by Ian E. Rinehart and Bart Elias. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 2 U.S. Regional Allies and Partners, and U.S. Regional Security Architecture The SCS, ECS, and Yellow Sea border three U.S. treaty allies: Japan, South Korea, and the Philippines. (For additional information on the U.S. security treaties with Japan the Philippines, see Appendix B.) In addition, the SCS and ECS (including the Taiwan Strait) surround Taiwan, regarding which the United States has certain security-related policies under the Taiwan Relations Act (H.R. 2479/P.L. 96-8 of April 10, 1979), and the SCS borders Southeast Asian nations that are current, emerging, or potential U.S. partner countries, such as Singapore, Vietnam, and Indonesia. In a conflict with the United States, Chinese bases in the SCS and forces operating from them would add to a regional network of Chinese anti-access/area-denial (A2/AD) capabilities intended to keep U.S. military forces outside the first island chain (and thus away from China’s mainland and Taiwan).5 Chinese bases in the SCS and forces operating from them could also help create a bastion (i.e., a defended operating sanctuary) in the SCS for China’s emerging sea-based strategic deterrent force of nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs). In a conflict with the United States, Chinese bases in the SCS and forces operating from them would be vulnerable to U.S. attack. Attacking the bases and the forces operating from them, however, would tie down the attacking U.S. forces for a time at least, delaying the use of those U.S. forces elsewhere in a larger conflict, and potentially delay the advance of U.S. forces into the SCS. One analyst has argued that destroying the bases and countering the forces operating from them would take much more effort by U.S. forces than is commonly believed.6 Short of a conflict with the United States, Chinese bases in the SCS, and more generally, Chinese domination over or control of its near-seas region could help China to do one or more of the following on a day-to-day basis:  control fishing operations and oil and gas exploration activities in the SCS;  coerce, intimidate, or put political pressure on other countries bordering on the SCS;  announce and enforce an air defense identification zone (ADIZ) over the SCS;  announce and enforce a maritime exclusion zone (i.e., a blockade) around Taiwan;7  facilitate the projection of Chinese military presence and political influence further into the Western Pacific; and  help achieve a broader goal of becoming a regional hegemon in its part of Eurasia. 5 The term first island chain refers to a string of islands, including Japan and the Philippines, that encloses China’s near-seas region. The term second island chain, which reaches out to Guam, refers to a line that can be drawn that encloses both China’s near-seas region and the Philippine Sea between the Philippines and Guam. For a map of the first and second island chains, see Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress [on] Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2015, p. 87. The exact position and shape of the lines demarcating the first and second island chains often differ from map to map. 6 See Gregory B. Poling, “The Conventional Wisdom on China’s Island Bases Is Dangerously Wrong,” War on the Rocks, January 10, 2020. See also John Power, “Has the US Already Lost the Battle for the South China Sea?” South China Morning Post, January 18, 2020. See also David Geaney, “China’s Island Fortifications Are a Challenge to International Norms,” Defense News, April 17, 2020. 7 For a discussion of this possibility, see Lyle J. Goldstein, “China Could Announce a ‘Total Exclusion Zone’ at Any Time,” National Interest, October 25, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 3 In light of some of the preceding points, Chinese bases in the SCS, and more generally, Chinese domination over or control of its near-seas region could complicate the ability of the United States to  intervene militarily in a crisis or conflict between China and Taiwan;  fulfill U.S. obligations under U.S. defense treaties with Japan and the Philippines and South Korea;  operate U.S. forces in the Western Pacific for various purposes, including maintaining regional stability, conducting engagement and partnership-building operations, responding to crises, and executing war plans; and  prevent the emergence of China as a regional hegemon in its part of Eurasia.8 A reduced U.S. ability to do one or more of the above could encourage countries in the region to reexamine their own defense programs and foreign policies, potentially leading to a further change in the region’s security architecture. Some observers believe that China is trying to use disputes in the SCS and ECS to raise doubts among U.S. allies and partners in the region about the dependability of the United States as an ally or partner, or to otherwise drive a wedge between the United States and its regional allies and partners, so as to weaken the U.S.-led regional security architecture and thereby facilitate greater Chinese influence over the region. Some observers remain concerned that maritime territorial disputes in the ECS and SCS could lead to a crisis or conflict between China and a neighboring country such as Japan or the Philippines, and that the United States could be drawn into such a crisis or conflict as a result of obligations the United States has under bilateral security treaties with Japan and the Philippines. Most recently, those concerns have focused more on the possibility of a crisis or conflict between China and Japan over the Senkaku Islands. Principle of Nonuse of Force or Coercion A key element of the U.S.-led international order that has operated since World War II is the principle that force or coercion should not be used as a means of settling disputes between countries, and certainly not as a routine or first-resort method. Some observers are concerned that China’s actions in SCS and ECS challenge this principle and—along with Russia’s actions in Crimea and eastern Ukraine—could help reestablish the very different principle of “might makes right” (i.e., the law of the jungle) as a routine or defining characteristic of international relations.9 Principle of Freedom of the Seas Overview Another key element of the U.S.-led international order that has operated since World War II is the principle of freedom of the seas, meaning the treatment of the world’s seas under international law as international waters (i.e., as a global commons), and freedom of operations in international 8 It has been a long-standing goal of U.S. grand strategy to prevent the emergence of a regional hegemon in one part of Eurasia or another. For additional discussion, see CRS In Focus IF10485, Defense Primer: Geography, Strategy, and U.S. Force Design, by Ronald O'Rourke. 9 See, for example, Dan Lamothe, “Navy admiral warns of growing sense that ‘might makes right’ in Southeast Asia,” Washington Post, March 16, 2016. Related terms and concepts include the law of the jungle or the quotation from the Melian Dialogue in Thucydides’ History of the Peloponnesian War that “the strong do what they can and the weak suffer what they must.” U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 4 waters. Freedom of the seas is sometimes referred to as freedom of navigation, although the term freedom of navigation is sometimes defined—particularly by parties who might not support freedom of the seas—in a narrow fashion, to include merely the freedom for commercial ships to pass through sea areas, as opposed to the freedom for both civilian and military ships and aircraft to conduct various activities at sea or in the airspace above. A more complete way to refer to the principle of freedom of the seas, as stated in the Department of Defense’s (DOD’s) annual Freedom of Navigation (FON) report, is “the rights, freedoms, and uses of the sea and airspace guaranteed to all nations by international law.”10 DOD states that freedom of the seas includes more than the mere freedom of commercial vessels to transit through international waterways. While not a defined term under international law, the Department uses “freedom of the seas” to mean all of the rights, freedoms, and lawful uses of the sea and airspace, including for military ships and aircraft, recognized under international law. Freedom of the seas is thus also essential to ensure access in the event of a crisis.11 The principle of freedom of the seas dates back about 400 years, to the early 1600s,12 and has long been a matter of importance to the United States. DOD states that Throughout its history, the United States has asserted a key national interest in preserving the freedom of the seas, often calling on its military forces to protect that interest. Following independence, one of the U.S. Navy’s first missions was to defend U.S. commercial vessels in the Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea from pirates and other maritime threats. The United States went to war in 1812, in part, to defend its citizens’ rights to commerce on the seas. In 1918, President Woodrow Wilson named “absolute freedom of navigation upon the seas” as one of the universal principles for which the United States and other nations were fighting World War I. Similarly, before World War II, President Franklin Roosevelt declared that our military forces had a “duty of maintaining the American policy of freedom of the seas.”13 China’s Position Some observers are concerned that China’s interpretation of law of the sea and its actions in the SCS pose a significant challenge to the principle of freedom of the seas. Matters of particular concern in this regard include China’s nine-dash line in the SCS, China’s apparent narrow definition of freedom of navigation, and China’s position that coastal states have the right to regulate the activities of foreign military forces in their exclusive economic zones (EEZs) (see “China’s Approach to the SCS and ECS,” below, and Appendix A and Appendix E).14 10 Department of Defense, Department of Defense Report to Congress, Annual Freedom of Navigation Report Fiscal Year 2018, Pursuant to Section 1275 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018, December 31, 2018, p. 2. 11 Department of Defense, Asia-Pacific Maritime Security Strategy, undated but released August 2015, pp. 1, 2. 12 The idea that most of the world’s seas should be treated as international waters rather than as a space that could be appropriated as national territory dates back to Hugo Grotius (1583-1645), a founder of international law, whose 1609 book Mare Liberum (“The Free Sea”) helped to establish the primacy of the idea over the competing idea, put forth by the legal jurist and scholar John Seldon (1584-1654) in his book 1635 book Mare Clausum (“Closed Sea”), that the sea could be appropriated as national territory, like the land. For further discussion, see “Hugo Grotius’ ‘Mare Liberum’—400th Anniversary,” International Law Observer, March 10, 2009. 13 Department of Defense, Department of Defense Report to Congress, Annual Freedom of Navigation Report Fiscal Year 2018, Pursuant to Section 1275 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018, December 31, 2018, p. 1. 14 A country’s EEZ includes waters extending up to 200 nautical miles from its land territory. EEZs were established as a feature of international law by United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). Coastal states have the U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 5 Observers are concerned that a challenge to freedom of the seas in the SCS could have implications for the United States not only in the SCS, but around the world, because international law is universal in application, and a challenge to a principle of international law in one part of the world, if accepted, could serve as a precedent for challenging it in other parts of the world.15 In general, limiting or weakening the principle of freedom of the seas could represent a departure or retreat from the roughly 400-year legal tradition of treating the world’s oceans as international waters (i.e., as a global commons) and as a consequence alter the international legal regime governing sovereignty over much of the surface of the world.16 More specifically, if China’s position on the issue of whether coastal states have the right to regulate the activities of foreign military forces in their EEZs were to gain greater international acceptance under international law, it could substantially affect U.S. naval operations not only in the SCS, but around the world, which in turn could substantially affect the ability of the United States to use its military forces to defend various U.S. interests overseas. Significant portions of the world’s oceans are claimable as EEZs, including high-priority U.S. Navy operating areas in the Western Pacific, the Persian Gulf, and the Mediterranean Sea.17 The legal right of U.S. naval forces to operate freely in EEZ waters—an application of the principle of freedom of the seas—is important to their ability to perform many of their missions around the world, because many of those missions are aimed at influencing events ashore, and having to conduct operations from outside a country’s EEZ (i.e., more than 200 miles offshore) would reduce the inland reach and responsiveness of U.S. ship-based sensors, aircraft, and missiles, and make it more difficult for the United States to transport Marines and their equipment from ship to shore. Restrictions on the ability of U.S. naval forces to operate in EEZ waters could potentially require changes (possibly very significant ones) in U.S. military strategy, U.S. foreign policy goals, or U.S. grand strategy.18 Trade Routes and Hydrocarbons Major commercial shipping routes pass through the SCS, which links the Western Pacific to the Indian Ocean and the Persian Gulf. An estimated $3.4 trillion worth of international shipping trade passes through the SCS each year.19 DOD states that “the South China Sea plays an important role in security considerations across East Asia because Northeast Asia relies heavily on the flow of oil and commerce through South China Sea shipping lanes, including more than 80 percent of the crude oil [flowing] to Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan.”20 In addition, the ECS and right UNCLOS to regulate foreign economic activities in their own EEZs. 15 See, for example, Lyle J. Goldstein, “China Studies the Contours of the Gray Zone; Beijing Strategists Go to School on Russian Tactics in the Black Sea,” National Interest, August 27, 2019. 16 See, for example, Roncevert Ganan Almond, “The Extraterrestrial [Legal] Impact of the South China Sea Dispute,” The Diplomat, October 3, 2017. 17 The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) calculates that EEZs account for about 30.4% of the world’s oceans. (See the table called “Comparative Sizes of the Various Maritime Zones” at the end of “Maritime Zones and Boundaries, accessed June 6, 2014, at http://www.gc.noaa.gov/gcil_maritime.html, which states that EEZs account for 101.9 million square kilometers of the world’s approximately 335.0 million square kilometers of oceans.) 18 See, for example, United States Senate, Committee on Foreign Relations, Committee on Foreign Relations, Hearing on Maritime Disputes and Sovereignty Issues in East Asia, July 15, 2009, Testimony of Peter Dutton, Associate Professor, China Maritime Studies Institute, U.S. Naval War College, pp. 2 and 6-7. 19 “How Much Trade Transits the South China Sea?” China Power (CSIS), accessed July 10, 2018, at https://chinapower.csis.org/much-trade-transits-south-china-sea/. 20 Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress [on] Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017, May 15, 2017, p. 41. See also Christian Edwards, “The South China Sea Is Fabled for Its Hidden Energy Reserves and China Wants to Block Outsiders Like the US from Finding Them,” Business Insider, U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 6 SCS contain potentially significant oil and gas exploration areas.21 Exploration activities there could potentially involve U.S. firms. The results of exploration activities there could eventually affect world oil prices.22 Interpreting China’s Role as a Major World Power China’s actions in the SCS and ECS could influence assessments that U.S. and other observers make about China’s role as a major world power, particularly regarding China’s approach to settling disputes between states (including whether China views force and coercion as acceptable means for settling such disputes, and consequently whether China believes that “might makes right”), China’s views toward the meaning and application of international law, and whether China views itself more as a stakeholder and defender of the current international order, or alternatively, more as a revisionist power that will seek to change elements of that order that it does not like. U.S.-China Relations in General Developments in the SCS and ECS could affect U.S.-China relations in general, which could have implications for other issues in U.S.-China relations.23 Maritime Territorial and EEZ Disputes Involving China This section provides a brief overview of maritime territorial and EEZ disputes involving China. For additional details on these disputes (including maps), see Appendix A. In addition, other CRS reports provide additional and more detailed information on the maritime territorial disputes.24 For background information on treaties and international agreements related to the disputes, see Appendix C. For background information on a July 2016 international tribunal award in an SCS arbitration case involving the Philippines and China, see Appendix D. November 13, 2018. 21 See, for example, Department of Defense, Asia-Pacific Maritime Security Strategy, undated but released August 2015, p. 5. The SCS and ECS also contain significant fishing grounds that are of interest primarily to China and other countries in the region. See, for example, Michael Perry, “Cooperative Maritime Law Enforcement and Overfishing in the South China Sea,” Center for International Maritime Security (CIMSEC), April 6, 2020; James G. Stavridis and Johan Bergenas, “The Fishing Wars Are Coming,” Washington Post, September 13, 2017; Keith Johnson, “Fishing Disputes Could Spark a South China Sea Crisis,” Foreign Policy, April 7, 2012. 22 For a contrary view regarding the importance of the SCS in connection with trade routes and hydrocarbons, see Marshall Hoyler, “The South China Sea Is Overrated, Assigning the South China Sea Geostrategic Importance Based on Its Popular Sea Lanes or Assumed Oil and Gas Reserves Is Suspect,” U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, June 2019. 23 For discussions of U.S.-China relations, see CRS In Focus IF10119, U.S.-China Relations, by Susan V. Lawrence, Michael F. Martin, and Andres B. Schwarzenberg, and CRS Report R41108, U.S.-China Relations: An Overview of Policy Issues, by Susan V. Lawrence. 24 See CRS In Focus IF10607, South China Sea Disputes: Background and U.S. Policy, by Ben Dolven, Susan V. Lawrence, and Ronald O'Rourke; CRS Report R42930, Maritime Territorial Disputes in East Asia: Issues for Congress, by Ben Dolven, Mark E. Manyin, and Shirley A. Kan; CRS Report R44072, Chinese Land Reclamation in the South China Sea: Implications and Policy Options, by Ben Dolven et al.; CRS Report R43894, China's Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ), by Ian E. Rinehart and Bart Elias. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 7 Maritime Territorial Disputes China is a party to multiple maritime territorial disputes in the SCS and ECS, including in particular the following:  a dispute over the Paracel Islands in the SCS, which are claimed by China and Vietnam, and occupied by China;  a dispute over the Spratly Islands in the SCS, which are claimed entirely by China, Taiwan, and Vietnam, and in part by the Philippines, Malaysia, and Brunei, and which are occupied in part by all these countries except Brunei;  a dispute over Scarborough Shoal in the SCS, which is claimed by China, Taiwan, and the Philippines, and controlled since 2012 by China; and  a dispute over the Senkaku Islands in the ECS, which are claimed by China, Taiwan, and Japan, and administered by Japan. EEZ Dispute25 In addition to maritime territorial disputes in the SCS and ECS, China is involved in a dispute, principally with the United States, over whether China has a right under international law to regulate the activities of foreign military forces operating within China’s EEZ. The position of the United States and most other countries is that while the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which established EEZs as a feature of international law, gives coastal states the right to regulate economic activities (such as fishing and oil exploration) within their EEZs, it does not give coastal states the right to regulate foreign military activities in the parts of their EEZs beyond their 12-nautical-mile territorial waters.26 The position of China and some other countries (i.e., a minority group among the world’s nations) is that UNCLOS gives coastal states the right to regulate not only economic activities, but also foreign military activities, in their EEZs. The dispute over whether China has a right under UNCLOS to regulate the activities of foreign military forces operating within its EEZ appears to be at the heart of incidents between Chinese and U.S. ships and aircraft in international waters and airspace dating back at least to 2001. Relationship of Maritime Territorial Disputes to EEZ Dispute The issue of whether China has the right under UNCLOS to regulate foreign military activities in its EEZ is related to, but ultimately separate from, the issue of territorial disputes in the SCS and ECS:  The two issues are related because China can claim EEZs from inhabitable islands over which it has sovereignty, so accepting China’s claims to sovereignty over inhabitable islands in the SCS or ECS could permit China to expand the EEZ zone within which China claims a right to regulate foreign military activities. 25 In this report, the term EEZ dispute is used to refer to a dispute principally between China and the United States over whether coastal states have a right under international law to regulate the activities of foreign military forces operating in their EEZs. There are also other kinds of EEZ disputes, including disputes between neighboring countries regarding the extents of their adjacent EEZs. 26 The legal term under UNCLOS for territorial waters is territorial seas. This report uses the more colloquial term territorial waters to avoid confusion with terms like South China Sea and East China Sea. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 8  The two issues are ultimately separate from one another because even if all the territorial disputes in the SCS and ECS were resolved, and none of China’s claims in the SCS and ECS were accepted, China could continue to apply its concept of its EEZ rights to the EEZ that it unequivocally derives from its mainland coast—and it is in this unequivocal Chinese EEZ that several of the past U.S.-Chinese incidents at sea have occurred. From the U.S. perspective, the EEZ dispute is arguably as significant as the maritime territorial disputes because of the EEZ dispute’s proven history of leading to U.S.-Chinese incidents at sea and because of its potential for affecting U.S. military operations not only in the SCS and ECS, but around the world. China’s Approach to the SCS and ECS This section provides a brief overview of China’s approach to the SCS and ECS. For additional information on China’s approach to the SCS and ECS, see Appendix E. In General China’s approach to maritime disputes in the SCS and ECS, and to strengthening its position over time in the SCS, can be characterized in general as follows:  China appears to have identified the assertion and defense of its maritime territorial claims in the SCS and ECS, and the strengthening of its position in the SCS, as important national goals.  To achieve these goals, China appears to be employing an integrated, whole-of-society strategy that includes diplomatic, informational, economic, military, paramilitary/law enforcement, and civilian elements.  In implementing this integrated strategy, China appears to be persistent, patient, tactically flexible, willing to expend significant resources, and willing to absorb at least some amount of reputational and other costs that other countries might seek to impose on China in response to China’s actions.27 Table 1 summarizes China’s apparent goals relating to the South China, and the types of actions it undertakes in support of those goals, as assessed by the Center for a New American Security in a January 2020 report on China’s strategy for the South China Sea. “Salami-Slicing” Strategy and Gray Zone Operations Observers frequently characterize China’s approach to the SCS and ECS as a “salami-slicing” strategy that employs a series of incremental actions, none of which by itself is a casus belli, to gradually change the status quo in China’s favor. Other observers have referred to China’s approach as a strategy of gray zone operations (i.e., operations that reside in a gray zone between peace and war), of creeping annexation28 or creeping invasion,29 or as a “talk and take” strategy, meaning a strategy in which China engages in (or draws out) negotiations while taking actions to 27 For additional discussion, see Patrick M. Cronin and Ryan Neuhard, Total Competition, China’s Challenge in the South China Sea, Center for a New American Security, January 2020, pp. 5-28; and Kerry K. Gershaneck, “China’s ‘Political Warfare’ Aims at South China Sea,” Asia Times, July 3, 2018. 28 See, for example, Alan Dupont, “China’s Maritime Power Trip,” The Australian, May 24, 2014. 29 Jackson Diehl, “China’s ‘Creeping Invasion,” Washington Post, September 14, 2014. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 9 gain control of contested areas.30 A March 17, 2020, press report in China’s state-controlled media stated that “Chinese military experts on Tuesday [March 17] suggested the use of non-lethal electromagnetic weapons, including low-energy laser devices, in expelling US warships that have been repeatedly intruding into the South China Sea in the past week.”31 Table 1. China’s Apparent Goals and Supporting Actions for South China Sea As assessed in January 2020 CNAS report Supporting actions Apparent goals Rally support domestically Deter U.S. Intimidate neighbors and encourage appeasement/compliance Tempt neighbors to cooperate in exchange for future economic benefits Reinforce image of China as an economic powerhouse PLA operationsa X X X China Coast Guard operationsb X X X Maritime militia swarming X Dredging fleet and island construction team operationsc X X X Operations by state banks and state-owned enterprisesd X X State media operationse X X X Source: Adapted by CRS from table on page 20 of Patrick M. Cronin and Ryan Neuhard, Total Competition, China’s Challenge in the South China Sea, Center for a New American Security, January 2020. a. Includes military exercises, weapons tests, port visits, patrols throughout the SCS, military parades, and participation in echelon formation. b. Includes deployment of large vessels and participation in echelon formation. c. Includes large-scale dredging and island building, and construction of permanent facilities on disputed features. d. Highly visible economic projects around the region, such as bridges, ports, and rail lines. e. Includes propaganda about the PLA, China’s influence (including its military and economic might and its political importance), U.S. decline or weakness, and other states conceding to China’s preferences. Island Building and Base Construction Perhaps more than any other set of actions, China’s island-building (aka land-reclamation) and base-construction activities at sites that it occupies in the Paracel Islands and Spratly Islands in the SCS have heightened concerns among U.S. observers that China is rapidly gaining effective control of the SCS. China’s large-scale island-building and base-construction activities in the SCS appear to have begun around December 2013, and were publicly reported starting in May 2014. Awareness of, and concern about, the activities appears to have increased substantially 30 The strategy has been called “talk and take” or “take and talk.” See, for example, Anders Corr, “China’s Take-And-Talk Strategy In The South China Sea,” Forbes, March 29, 2017. See also Namrata Goswami, “Can China Be Taken Seriously on its ‘Word’ to Negotiate Disputed Territory?” The Diplomat, August 18, 2017. 31 Liu Xuanzun, “US Intrusions in S.China Sea Can Be Stopped by Electromagnetic Weapons: Experts,” Global Times, March 17, 2020. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 10 following the posting of a February 2015 article showing a series of “before and after” satellite photographs of islands and reefs being changed by the work.32 China occupies seven sites in the Spratly Islands. It has engaged in island-building and facilities-construction activities at most or all of these sites, and particularly at three of them—Fiery Cross Reef, Subi Reef, and Mischief Reef, all of which now feature lengthy airfields as well as substantial numbers of buildings and other structures. Although other countries, such as Vietnam, have engaged in their own island-building and facilities-construction activities at sites that they occupy in the SCS, these efforts are dwarfed in size by China’s island-building and base-construction activities in the SCS.33 Other Chinese Actions That Have Heightened Concerns In addition to island-building and base-construction activities, additional Chinese actions in the SCS and ECS that have heightened concerns among U.S. observers include the following, among others:  China’s actions in 2012, following a confrontation between Chinese and Philippine ships at Scarborough Shoal in the SCS, to gain de facto control over access to the shoal and its fishing grounds;  China’s announcement on November 23, 2013, of an air defense identification zone (ADIZ) over the ECS that includes airspace over the Senkaku Islands;34  frequent patrols by Chinese Coast Guard ships—some observers refer to them as harassment operations—at the Senkaku Islands;  Chinese pressure against the small Philippine military presence at Second Thomas Shoal in the Spratly Islands, where a handful of Philippine military personnel occupy a beached (and now derelict) Philippine navy amphibious ship;35  a growing civilian Chinese presence on some of the sites in the SCS occupied by China in the SCS, including both Chinese vacationers and (in the Paracels) permanent settlements; and  the movement of some military systems to its newly built bases in the SCS. Use of Coast Guard Ships and Maritime Militia China asserts and defends its maritime claims not only with its navy, but also with its coast guard and its maritime militia. Indeed, China employs its coast guard and maritime militia more regularly and extensively than its navy in its maritime sovereignty-assertion operations. DOD 32 Mira Rapp-Hooper, “Before and After: The South China Sea Transformed,” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative (CSIS), February 18, 2015. 33 See, for example, “Vietnam’s Island Building: Double-Standard or Drop in the Bucket?,” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative (CSIS), May 11, 2016. For additional details on China’s island-building and base-construction activities in the SCS, see, in addition to Appendix E, CRS Report R44072, Chinese Land Reclamation in the South China Sea: Implications and Policy Options, by Ben Dolven et al. 34 See CRS Report R43894, China's Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ), by Ian E. Rinehart and Bart Elias. 35 See, for example, Patricia Lourdes Viray, “China’s Blockade of Ayungin Shoal Resupply ‘Objectionable’—Palace,” Philstar, September 23, 2019; Patricia Louordes Viray, “China Coast Guard Blocked Resupply Mission to Ayungin Shoal,” Philstar, September 19, 2019; Audrey Morallo, “China’s Navy, Coast Guard ‘Harassed’ Filipino Troops on Resupply Mission on Ayungin—Alejano,” Philstar, May 30, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 11 states that China’s navy, coast guard, and maritime militia together “form the largest maritime force in the Indo-Pacific.”36 Apparent Narrow Definition of “Freedom of Navigation” China regularly states that it supports freedom of navigation and has not interfered with freedom of navigation. China, however, appears to hold a narrow definition of freedom of navigation that is centered on the ability of commercial cargo ships to pass through international waters. In contrast to the broader U.S./Western definition of freedom of navigation (aka freedom of the seas), the Chinese definition does not appear to include operations conducted by military ships and aircraft. It can also be noted that China has frequently interfered with commercial fishing operations by non-Chinese fishing vessels—something that some observers regard as a form of interfering with freedom of navigation for commercial ships. Position Regarding Regulation of Military Forces in EEZs As mentioned earlier, the position of China and some other countries (i.e., a minority group among the world’s nations) is that UNCLOS gives coastal states the right to regulate not only economic activities, but also foreign military activities, in their EEZs. Depiction of United States as Outsider Seeking to “Stir Up Trouble” Along with its preference for treating territorial disputes on a bilateral rather than multilateral basis (see Appendix E for details), China resists and objects to U.S. involvement in maritime disputes in the SCS and ECS. Statements in China’s state-controlled media sometimes depict the United States as an outsider or interloper whose actions (including freedom of navigation operations) are meddling or seeking to “stir up trouble” in an otherwise peaceful regional situation. Potential or actual Japanese involvement in the SCS is sometimes depicted in China’s state-controlled media in similar terms. Depicting the United States in this manner can be viewed as consistent with goals of attempting to drive a wedge between the United States and its allies and partners in the region and of ensuring maximum leverage in bilateral (rather than multilateral) discussions with other countries in the region over maritime territorial disputes. Assessments of China’s Strengthening Position in SCS Some observers assess that China’s actions in the SCS have achieved for China a more dominant or more commanding position in the SCS. For example, U.S. Navy Admiral Philip Davidson, in responses to advance policy questions from the Senate Armed Services Committee for an April 17, 2018, hearing before the committee to consider nominations, including Davidson’s nomination to become Commander, U.S. Pacific Command (PACOM),37 stated that “China is now capable of controlling the South China Sea in all scenarios short of war with the United States.”38 For additional assessments of China’s strengthening position in the SCS, see Appendix F. 36 Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress [on] Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2018, p. 16. See also Andrew S. Erickson, “Maritime Numbers Game, Understanding and Responding to China’s Three Sea Forces,” Indo-Pacific Defense Forum, January 28, 2019. 37 The name of the command has since been changed to the U.S. Indo-Pacific Command (INDOPACOM). 38 Advance Policy Questions for Admiral Philip Davidson, USN Expected Nominee for Commander, U.S. Pacific Command, p. 18. See also pp. 8, 16, 17, 19, and 43. See also Hannah Beech, “China’s Sea Control Is a Done Deal, ‘Short of War With the U.S.,’” New York Times, September 20, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 12 U.S. Position on Regarding Issues Relating to SCS and ECS Some Key Elements The U.S. position regarding issues relating to the SCS and ECS includes the following elements, among others:  Freedom of the seas:  The United States supports the principle of freedom of the seas, meaning the rights, freedoms, and uses of the sea and airspace guaranteed to all nations in international law. The United States opposes claims that impinge on the rights, freedoms, and lawful uses of the sea that belong to all nations.  U.S. forces routinely conduct freedom of navigation (FON) assertions throughout the world. These operations are designed to be conducted in accordance with international law and demonstrate that the United States will fly, sail, and operate wherever international law allows, regardless of the location of excessive maritime claims and regardless of current events.39  The United States, like most other countries, believes that coastal states under UNCLOS have the right to regulate economic activities in their EEZs, but do not have the right to regulate foreign military activities in their EEZs. The United States will continue to operate its military ships in the EEZs of other countries consistent with this position. (For additional information regarding the U.S. position on the issue of operational rights of military ships in the EEZs of other countries, see Appendix G.)  U.S. military surveillance flights in international airspace above another country’s EEZ are lawful under international law, and the United States plans to continue conducting these flights.  Maritime territorial disputes:  The United States takes no position on competing claims to sovereignty over disputed land features in the ECS and SCS, but the United States does have a position on how competing claims should be resolved: These disputes, like international disputes in general, should be resolved peacefully, without coercion, intimidation, threats, or the use of force, and in a manner consistent with international law.  Parties should avoid taking provocative or unilateral actions that disrupt the status quo or jeopardize peace and security. The United States does not believe that large-scale island-building with the intent to militarize outposts on disputed land features is consistent with the region’s desire for peace and stability. 39 Statements such as this one, including in particular the phrase “the United States will fly, sail, and operate wherever international law allows,” have become recurring elements of U.S. statements issued either in connection with specific FON operations or as general statements of U.S. policy regarding freedom of the seas. See, for example, the Navy statement quoted in Ben Werner, “Beijing Irked at Twin U.S. South China Sea FONOPS,” USNI News, November 22, 2019. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 13  The Senkaku Islands are under the administration of Japan. Unilateral attempts to change the status quo there raise tensions and do nothing under international law to strengthen territorial claims.  Claims of territorial waters and EEZs should be consistent with customary international law of the sea and must therefore, among other things, derive from land features. Claims in the SCS that are not derived from land features are fundamentally flawed. China’s maritime claims in the SCS, exemplified by the preposterous nine-dash line, are unfounded, unlawful, and unreasonable, and are without legal, historic, or geographic merit.40  China’s unilateral efforts to assert illegitimate maritime claims threaten other nations’ access to vital natural resources, undermine the stability of regional energy markets, and increase the risk of conflict.41 The United States will not accept attempts to assert unlawful maritime claims at the expense of law-abiding nations.42 An April 9, 2020, DOD statement stated The Department of Defense is greatly concerned by reports of a China Coast Guard vessel's collision with and sinking of a Vietnam fishing vessel in the vicinity of the Paracel Islands in the South China Sea. The PRC's behavior stands in contrast to the United States' vision of a free and open Indo-Pacific region, in which all nations, large and small, are secure in their sovereignty, free from coercion, and able to pursue economic growth consistent with accepted international rules and norms. The United States will continue to support efforts by our allies and partners to ensure freedom of navigation and economic opportunity throughout the entire Indo-Pacific. The COVID-19 pandemic underscores the importance of the rules based international order, as it sets the conditions that enable us to address this shared threat in a way that is transparent, focused, and effective. We call on all parties to refrain from actions that would destabilize the region, distract from the global response to the pandemic, or risk needlessly contributing to loss of life and property.43 In an April 22, 2020, statement, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo stated Even as we fight the [COVID-19] outbreak, we must remember that the long-term threats to our shared security have not disappeared. In fact, they’ve become more prominent. Beijing has moved to take advantage of the distraction, from China’s new unilateral announcement of administrative districts over disputed islands and maritime areas in the 40 Department of State, A Free and Open Indo-Pacific, Advancing a Shared Vision, November 4, 2019, states on page 23: “PRC maritime claims in the South China Sea, exemplified by the preposterous ‘nine-dash line,’ are unfounded, unlawful, and unreasonable. These claims, which are without legal, historic, or geographic merit, impose real costs on other countries. Through repeated provocative actions to assert the nine-dash line, Beijing is inhibiting ASEAN members from accessing over $2.5 trillion in recoverable energy reserves, while contributing to instability and the risk of conflict.” 41 In a November 20, 2019, speech in Hanoi, Secretary of Defense Mark Esper reportedly stated, “China’s unilateral efforts to assert illegitimate maritime claims threaten other nations’ access to vital natural resources, undermine the stability of regional energy markets, and increase the risk of conflict.” (Phil Stewart and James Pearson, “U.S. to Provide Ship to Vietnam to Boost South China Sea Patrols,” Reuters, November 20, 2019.) 42 In a November 20, 2019, speech in Hanoi, Secretary of Defense Mark Esper reportedly stated, “We will not accept attempts to assert unlawful maritime claims at the expense of law-abiding nations.” (As quoted in Robert Burns, “Esper Accuses China of Intimidating Smaller Asian Nations,” Associated Press, November 20, 2019.) 43 Department of Defense, “China Coast Guard Sinking of a Vietnam Fishing Vessel,” April 9, 2020. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 14 South China Sea, its sinking of a Vietnamese fishing vessel earlier this month, and its “research stations” on Fiery Cross Reef and Subi Reef. The PRC continues to deploy maritime militia around the Spratly Islands and most recently, the PRC has dispatched a flotilla that included an energy survey vessel for the sole purpose of intimidating other claimants from engaging in offshore hydrocarbon development. It is important to highlight how the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) is exploiting the world’s focus on the COVID-19 crisis by continuing its provocative behavior. The CCP is exerting military pressure and coercing its neighbors in the SCS, even going so far as to sink a Vietnamese fishing vessel. The U.S. strongly opposes China’s bullying and we hope other nations will hold them to account too.44 An April 29, 2020, statement from the U.S. Navy 7th Fleet stated Unlawful and sweeping maritime claims in the South China Sea pose a serious threat to the freedom of the seas, including the freedoms of navigation and overflight and the right of innocent passage of all ships. The U.S. position on the South China Sea is no different than that of any other area around the world where the international law of the sea as reflected in the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention provides for certain rights and freedoms and other lawful uses of the sea to all nations. The international community has an enduring role in preserving the freedom of the seas, which is critical to global security, stability, and prosperity. As long as some countries continue to claim and assert limits on rights that exceed what is provided for under international law as reflected in the Law of the Sea Convention, the United States will continue to demonstrate its resolve to uphold these rights and freedoms for all. No member of the international community should be intimidated or coerced into giving up their rights and freedoms. China, Taiwan, Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei and the Philippines each claim sovereignty over some or all of the Spratly Islands. China, Vietnam, and Taiwan purport to require either permission or advance notification before a military vessel or warship engages in “innocent passage” through the territorial sea. Under international law as reflected in the Law of the Sea Convention, the ships of all States—including their warships—enjoy the right of innocent passage through the territorial sea. The unilateral imposition of any authorization or advance-notification requirement for innocent passage is not permitted by international law, so the United States challenged those requirements. By engaging in innocent passage[s] without giving prior notification to or asking permission from any of the claimants, the United States challenge[s] the unlawful restrictions imposed by China, Taiwan, and Vietnam. The United States demonstrated that innocent passage may not be subject to such restrictions. U.S. forces operate in the South China Sea on a daily basis, as they have for more than a century. All of our operations are designed to be conducted in accordance with international law and demonstrate the United States will fly, sail, and operate wherever international law allows—regardless of the location of excessive maritime claims and regardless of current events. 44 Department of State, “The United States and ASEAN are Partnering to Defeat COVID-19, Build Long-Term Resilience, and Support Economic Recovery,” Press Statement, Michael R. Pompeo, Secretary of State, April 22, 2020. See also A. Ananthalakshmi and Rozanna Latiff, “U.S. Says China Should Stop 'Bullying Behaviour' in South China Sea,” Reuters, April 18, 2020; Gordon Lubold and Dion Nissenbaum, “With Trump Facing Virus Crisis, U.S. Warns Rivals Not to Seek Advantage,” Wall Street Journal, April 20, 2020; Brad Lendon, “Coronavirus may be giving Beijing an opening in the South China Sea,” CNN, April 7, 2020; Agence France-Presse, “US Warns China Not to 'Exploit' Virus for Sea Disputes,” Channel News Asia, April 6, 2020. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 15 The United States upholds freedom of navigation as a principle. The Freedom of Navigation Program’s missions are conducted peacefully and without bias for or against any particular country. These missions are based in the rule of law and demonstrate our commitment to upholding the rights, freedoms, and lawful uses of the sea and airspace guaranteed to all nations.45 Freedom of Navigation (FON) Program U.S. Navy ships challenge what the United States views as excessive maritime claims made by other countries, and otherwise carry out assertions of operational rights, as part of the U.S. FON program for challenging maritime claims that the United States believes to be inconsistent with international law. The FON program began in 1979, involves diplomatic activities as well as operational assertions by U.S. Navy ships, and is global in scope, encompassing activities and operations directed not only at China, but at numerous other countries around the world, including U.S. allies and partner states. DOD’s record of “excessive maritime claims DOD challenged through operational assertions and activities during the period of October 1, 2017, through September 30, 2018, to preserve the rights, freedoms, and uses of the sea and airspace guaranteed to all nations by international law” includes a listing for multiple challenges that were conducted to challenge Chinese claims.46 In a November 19, 2019, speech in Manila, Secretary of Defense Mark Esper reportedly stated that the United States had conducted “more freedom of navigation operations in the past year or so than we have in the past 20-plus years.”47 For additional information on the FON program, see Appendix H. Issues for Congress Strategy for Competing Strategically with China in SCS and ECS Overview A key issue for Congress is whether the Trump Administration’s strategy for competing strategically with China in the SCS and ECS is appropriate and correctly resourced, and whether Congress should approve, reject, or modify the strategy, the level of resources for implementing it, or both. Decisions that Congress makes on these issues could substantially affect U.S. strategic, political, and economic interests in the Indo-Pacific region and elsewhere. As noted earlier, competing strategically with China in the SCS and ECS forms an element of the Trump Administration’s more confrontational overall approach toward China and its efforts for promoting the FOIP construct. It is possible, however, for an observer to support a more 45 Source: Text of statement as reprinted in Sam LaGrone, “USS Bunker Hill Conducts 2nd South China Sea Freedom of Navigation Operation This Week,” USNI News, April 29, 2020. The 7th Fleet issued the statement in connection with a freedom of navigation (FON) operation conducted by a U,S, Navy ship in the South China Sea on April 29, 2020, that is shown in Table 2. 46 Department of Defense, Department of Defense Report to Congress, Annual Freedom of Navigation Report [for] Fiscal Year 2018, Pursuant to Section 1275 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018, pp. 2-3. 47 As quoted in Andreo Calonzo and Glen Carey, “U.S. Increased Sea Patrols to Send Message to China, Defense Secretary Says,” Bloomberg, November 19, 2019. See also Deutsche Presse-Agentur and Associated Press, “US to Boost Military Alliance with Philippines as South China Sea Tensions Grow,” South China Sea Morning Post, November 19, 2019. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 16 confrontational approach toward China and the FOIP construct but nevertheless conclude that the United States should not compete strategically with China in the SCS and ECS, or that the Trump Administration’s strategy for doing so is not appropriate or correctly resourced. Conversely, it is possible for an observer to disagree with the Trump Administration’s overall approach toward China or the FOIP construct, but nevertheless conclude that the United States should compete strategically with China in the SCS and ECS, and that the Trump Administration’s strategy for doing so is appropriate and correctly resourced. Whether to compete strategically with China in the SCS and ECS, and if so how, is a choice for U.S. policymakers to make, based on an assessment of the potential benefits and costs of engaging in such a competition in the context of overall U.S. policy toward China,48 U.S. policy toward the Indo-Pacific,49 and U.S. foreign policy in general. Potential U.S. Goals in a Strategic Competition General Goals For observers who conclude that the United States should compete strategically with China in the SCS and ECS, potential general U.S. goals for such a competition include but are not necessarily limited to the following, which are not listed in any particular order and are not mutually exclusive:  fulfilling U.S. security commitments in the Western Pacific, including treaty commitments to Japan and the Philippines;  maintaining and enhancing the U.S.-led security architecture in the Western Pacific, including U.S. security relationships with treaty allies and partner states;  maintaining a regional balance of power favorable to the United States and its allies and partners;  defending the principle of peaceful resolution of disputes, under which disputes between countries should be resolved peacefully, without coercion, intimidation, threats, or the use of force, and in a manner consistent with international law, and resisting the emergence of an alternative “might-makes-right” approach to international affairs;  defending the principle of freedom of the seas, meaning the rights, freedoms, and uses of the sea and airspace guaranteed to all nations in international law, including the interpretation held by the United States and many other countries concerning operational freedoms for military forces in EEZs;  preventing China from becoming a regional hegemon in East Asia, and potentially as part of that, preventing China from controlling or dominating the ECS or SCS; and  pursing these goals as part of a larger U.S. strategy for competing strategically and managing relations with China. 48 For more on overall U.S.-China relations, see CRS In Focus IF10119, U.S.-China Relations, by Susan V. Lawrence, Michael F. Martin, and Andres B. Schwarzenberg, and CRS Report R41108, U.S.-China Relations: An Overview of Policy Issues, by Susan V. Lawrence. 49 For more on U.S. policy toward the Indo-Pacific, see CRS Report R45396, The Trump Administration’s “Free and Open Indo-Pacific”: Issues for Congress, coordinated by Bruce Vaughn; CRS In Focus IF11047, The Asia Pacific: Challenges and Opportunities for U.S. Policy, by Emma Chanlett-Avery et al. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 17 Specific Goals For observers who conclude that the United States should compete strategically with China in the SCS and ECS, potential specific U.S. goals for such a competition include but are not necessarily limited to the following, which are not listed in any particular order and are not mutually exclusive:  dissuading China from  carrying out additional base-construction activities in the SCS,  moving additional military personnel, equipment, and supplies to bases at sites that it occupies in the SCS,50  initiating island-building or base-construction activities at Scarborough Shoal in the SCS,  declaring straight baselines around land features it claims in the SCS,51 or  declaring an air defense identification zone (ADIZ) over the SCS; and  encouraging China to  reduce or end operations by its maritime forces at the Senkaku Islands in the ECS,  halt actions intended to put pressure against Philippine-occupied sites in the Spratly Islands,  encouraging China to halt actions intended to put pressure against the small Philippine military presence at Second Thomas Shoal in the Spratly Islands (or against any other Philippine-occupied sites in the Spratly Islands);  adopt the U.S./Western definition regarding freedom of the seas, including the freedom of U.S. and other non-Chinese military vessels to operate freely in China’s EEZ; and  accept and abide by the July 2016 tribunal award in the SCS arbitration case involving the Philippines and China (see Appendix D). Some Additional Considerations Regarding Strategic Competition Competing with China’s Approach in the SCS and ECS As stated earlier, China’s approach to the maritime disputes in the SCS and ECS, and to strengthening its position over time in the SCS, can be characterized in general as follows:  China appears to have identified the assertion and defense of its maritime territorial claims in the SCS and ECS, and the strengthening of its position in the SCS, as important national goals. 50 A June 20, 2019, press report states that “China has deployed at least four J-10 fighter jets to the contested Woody Island in the South China Sea, the first known deployment of fighter jets there since 2017.” (Brad Lendon, “South China Sea: Image Shows Chinese Fighter Jets Deployed to Contested Island,” CNN, June 20, 2019.) 51 For a discussion regarding the possibility of China declaring straight baselines around land features it claims in the SCS, see “Reading Between the Lines: The Next Spratly Legal Dispute,” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative (AMTI) (Center for Strategic and International Studies [CSIS]), March 21, 2019. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 18  To achieve these goals, China appears to be employing an integrated, whole-of-society strategy that includes diplomatic, informational, economic, military, paramilitary/law enforcement, and civilian elements.  In implementing this integrated strategy, China appears to be persistent, patient, tactically flexible, willing to expend significant resources, and willing to absorb at least some amount of reputational and other costs that other countries might seek to impose on China in response to China’s actions. The above points raise a possible question as to how likely a U.S. strategy for competing strategically with China in the SCS and ECS might be to achieve its goals if that strategy were one or more of the following:  one-dimensional rather than multidimensional or whole-of-government;  halting or intermittent rather than persistent;  insufficiently resourced; or  reliant on imposed costs that are not commensurate with the importance that China appears to have assigned to achieving its goals in the region. Aligning Actions with Goals In terms of identifying specific actions for a U.S. strategy for competing strategically with China in the SCS and ECS, a key element would be to have a clear understanding of which actions are intended to support which U.S. goals, and to maintain an alignment of actions with policy goals. For example, U.S. FON operations (FONOPs), which often feature prominently in discussions of actual or potential U.S. actions, can directly support a general goal of defending the principle of freedom of the seas, but might support other goals only indirectly, marginally, or not at all.52 A summary of U.S. actions and how they align with U.S. goals might produce a U.S. version of the summary of China’s apparent goals and supporting actions shown in Table 1. Cost-Imposing Actions Cost-imposing actions are actions intended to impose political/reputational, institutional, economic, or other costs on China for conducting certain activities in the ECS and SCS, with the aim of persuading China to stop or reverse those activities. Such cost-imposing actions need not be limited to the SCS and ECS. As a hypothetical example for purposes of illustrating the point, one potential cost-imposing action might be for the United States to respond to unwanted Chinese activities in the ECS or SCS by moving to suspend China’s observer status on the Arctic Council.53 Expanding the potential scope of cost-imposing actions to regions beyond the Western Pacific might make it possible to employ elements of U.S. power that cannot be fully exercised if the examination of potential cost-imposing strategies is confined to the Western Pacific. It might 52 For discussions bearing on this issue, see, for example, Caitlin Doornbos, “Freedom-of-Navigation Ops Will Not Dent Beijing’s South China Sea Claims, Experts Say,” Stars and Stripes, April 4, 2019; James Holmes, “Are Freedom of Navigation Operations in East Asia Enough?” National Interest, February 23, 2019; Zack Cooper and Gregory Poling, “America’s Freedom of Navigation Operations Are Lost at Sea, Far Wider Measures Are Needed to Challenge Beijing’s Maritime Aggression,” Foreign Policy, January 8, 2019. 53 For more on the Arctic Council, see CRS Report R41153, Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress, coordinated by Ronald O'Rourke. In a May 6, 2019, speech about the Arctic in Finland, Secretary of State Michael Pompeo stated that “China has observer status in the Arctic Council, but that status is contingent upon its respect for the sovereign rights of Arctic states.” (State Department, “Looking North: Sharpening America’s Arctic Focus,” Remarks, Michael R. Pompeo, Secretary of State, Rovaniemi, Finland, May 6, 2019, accessed August 20, 2019, at https://www.state.gov/looking-north-sharpening-americas-arctic-focus/.) U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 19 also, however, expand, geographically or otherwise, areas of tension or dispute between the United States and China. Actions to impose costs on China can also impose costs, or lead to China imposing costs, on the United States and its allies and partners. Whether to implement cost-imposing actions thus involves weighing the potential benefits and costs to the United States and its allies and partners of implementing those actions, as well as the potential consequences to the United States and its allies and partners of not implementing those actions. Contributions from Allies and Partners Another factor that policymakers may consider is the potential contribution that could be made to a U.S. strategy for competing strategically with China in the SCE and ECS by allies such as Japan, the Philippines, Australia, the UK, and France, as well as potential or emerging partner countries such as Vietnam, Indonesia, and India. Most or all of the countries just mentioned have taken steps of one kind or another in response to China’s actions in the SCS and ECS.54 For U.S. policymakers, one key question is how effective those steps by allies and partner countries have been, whether those steps could be strengthened, and whether they should be undertaken independent of or in coordination with the United States. A second key question concerns the kinds of actions that Philippine president Rodrigo Duterte might be willing to take, given his largely nonconfrontational policy toward China regarding the SCS, and what implications Philippine reluctance to take certain actions may have for limiting or reducing the potential effectiveness of U.S. options for responding to China’s actions in the SCS.55 54 See, for example, Richard Heydarian, “ASEAN Members Start Standing Up to China’s Maritime Aggression,” Nikkei Asian Review, February 3, 2020. Regarding recent actions by Indonesia specifically, see, for example, Niharika Mandhana, “In South China Sea Confrontation, Indonesia Resists China—Cautiously,” Wall Street Journal, January 17, 2020; Arys Aditya and Harry Suhartono, “U.S., Japan May Invest in Indonesia Islands Near South Chinas Sea,” Bloomberg, January 17, 2020; Ian Storey, “What Can Indonesia Do in Its Stand-off with China over the Natunas?” Straits Times, January 10, 2020; Prashanth Parameswaran, “Deterrence and South China Sea Strategy: What Do the Latest China-Indonesia Natuna Tensions Tell Us?” Diplomat, January 8, 2020. Regarding actions by Malaysia specifically, see, for example, Philip Bowring, “Potent New Challenge to Beijing’s Nine-Dash Line,” Asia Sentinel, January 8, 2020; Ted Regencia, “Malaysia FM: China’s ‘Nine-Dash Line’ Claim ‘Ridiculous,’” Al Jazerra, December 21, 2019; Joseph Sipalan, Liz Lee, Vincent Lee, and Gabriel Crossley, “Beijing Censures Malaysia Over Fresh South China Sea Claim,” Reuters, December 17, 2019. 55 See, for example, Richard Javad Heydarian, “How Duterte Turned the Philippines Into China’s New Play Thing,” National Interest, February 23, 2020; Meaghan Tobin, “Ending Philippines-US Military Pact Will Affect South China Sea Disputes: Analysts,”, February 16, 2020; Hal Brands, “A Filipino Battleground in China-U.S. Cool War,” Japan Times, September 23, 2019; Raissa Robles, “Duterte’s South China Sea U-Turn: Illegal Climbdown, or Clever Gambit for Oil?” South China Morning Post, September 11, 2019; Eimor Santos, “Experts Warn PH vs. Siding with China on UNCLOS Revision,” CNN, September 6, 2019; Richard Heydarian, “How Rodrigo Duterte’s Latest Beijing Visit Marks a Crossroads for China, the Philippines and Asia,” South China Morning Post, September 1, 2019; Richard Javad Heydarian, “Duterte’s Game in Beijing,” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, August 29, 2019; Andreo Calonzo and Claire Jiao, “Philippines Prefers China Loans Over U.S. ‘Strategic Confusion’ in South China Sea,” Bloomberg, May 20, 2019; Ana P. Santos and David Pierson, “Duterte Heeds to Pressure to Confront China as Midterms Approach in the Philippines,” Los Angeles Times, April 15, 2019; Michael Mazza, “US-Philippine Defense Tensions Weaken Regional Security,” Nikkei Asian Review, March 22, 2019; Prashanth Parameswaran, “China’s Creeping South China Sea Challenge in the Spotlight With New Facility,” Diplomat, February 7, 2019. See also CRS In Focus IF10250, The Philippines, by Thomas Lum and Ben Dolven; Richard Javad Heydarian, “US, Philippines Tacitly Realign Against China,” Asia Times, October 11, 2018; Richard Javad Heydarian, “US, Philippines Floating Back Together Again,” Asia Times, September 6, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 20 Trump Administration’s Strategy for Competing Strategically Overview The Trump Administration’s strategy for competing strategically with China in the SCS and ECS includes but is not necessarily limited to the following:  criticizing China’s actions in the SCS, and reaffirming the U.S. position on issues relating to the SCS and ECS, on a recurring basis;  conducting naval presence and FON operations in the SCS and Taiwan Strait transits with U.S. Navy ships and (more recently) U.S. Coast Guard cutters;  conducting overflight operations in the SCS and ECS with U.S. Air Force bombers;56  bolstering U.S. military presence and operations in the Indo-Pacific region in general, and developing new U.S. military concepts of operations for countering Chinese military forces in the Indo-Pacific region.57  maintaining and strengthening diplomatic ties and security cooperation with, and providing maritime-related security assistance to, countries in the SCS region; and  encouraging allied and partner states to do more individually and in coordination with one another to defend their interests in the SCS region.58 U.S. actions to provide maritime-related security assistance to countries in the region are being carried out to a large degree under the Indo-Pacific Maritime Security Initiative (IP MSI), an initiative (previously named the Southeast Asian MSI) that was originally announced by the Obama Administration in May 201559 and subsequently legislated by Congress60 to provide, initially, $425 million in maritime security assistance to those four countries over a five-year period. In addition to strengthening security cooperation with U.S. allies in the region, the United States has taken actions to increase U.S. defense and intelligence cooperation with Vietnam and Indonesia.61 56 See, for example, Dzirhan Mahadzir, “Air Force Keeping Up Presence Operations Over South China Sea,” USNI News, December 11, 2019; Liu Zhen, “US Warplanes on Beijing’s Radar in South China Sea, American Air Force Chiefs Say,” South China Morning Post, December 9, 2019. 57 For a brief discussion of these new concepts of operations, see CRS Report R43838, Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 58 See, for example, Eileen Ng, “US Official Urges ASEAN to Stand Up to Chine in Sea Row,” Associated Press, October 31, 2019. 59 Secretary of Defense Speech, IISS Shangri-La Dialogue: “A Regional Security Architecture Where Everyone Rises,” As Delivered by Secretary of Defense Ash Carter, Singapore, Saturday, May 30, 2015, accessed August 7, 2015, at http://www.defense.gov/Speeches/Speech.aspx?SpeechID=1945. See also Prashanth Parameswaran, “America’s New Maritime Security Initiative for Southeast Asia,” The Diplomat, April 2, 2016; Prashanth Parameswaran, “US Launches New Maritime Security Initiative at Shangri-La Dialogue 2015,” The Diplomat, June 2, 2015; Aaron Mehta, “Carter Announces $425M In Pacific Partnership Funding,” Defense News, May 30, 2015. See also Megan Eckstein, “The Philippines at Forefront of New Pentagon Maritime Security Initiative,” USNI News, April 18, 2016 (updated April 17, 2016). 60 Section 1263 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (S. 1356/P.L. 114-92 of November 25, 2015; 10 U.S.C. 2282 note), as amended by Section 1289 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017 (S. 2943/P.L. 114-328 of December 23, 2016). 61 See, for example, Robert Burns, “Mattis Pushes Closer Ties to Vietnam Amid Tension with China,” Associated U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 21 Recent Specific Actions Recent specific actions taken by the Trump Administration include but are not necessarily limited to the following:  As an apparent cost-imposing measure, DOD announced on May 23, 2018, that it was disinviting China from the 2018 RIMPAC (Rim of the Pacific) exercise.62  In November 2018, national security adviser John Bolton said the U.S. would oppose any agreements between China and other claimants to the South China Sea that limit free passage to international shipping.63  In January 2019, the then-U.S. Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral John Richardson, reportedly warned his Chinese counterpart that the U.S. Navy would treat China’s coast guard cutters and maritime militia vessels as combatants and respond to provocations by them in the same way as it would respond to provocations by Chinese navy ships.64  On March 1, 2019, Secretary of State Michael Pompeo stated, “As the South China Sea is part of the Pacific, any armed attack on Philippine forces, aircraft, or public vessels in the South China Sea will trigger mutual defense obligations under Article 4 of our Mutual Defense Treaty [with the Philippines].”65 (For more on this treaty, see Appendix B.) Press, October 14, 2018; Bill Gertz, “Trump Courts Vietnam to Ward Off Beijing in South China Sea,” Asia Times, November 14, 2017; William Gallo, “Mattis in Southeast Asia, Amid Fresh US Focus on China,” VOA News, January 22, 2018; Richard Javad Heydarian, “Mattis Signals Harder Line in South China Sea,” Asia Times, January 25, 2018; Patrick M. Cronin and Marvin C. Ott, “Deepening the US-Indonesian Strategic Partnership,” The Diplomat, February 17, 2018; Nike Ching, “US, Vietnam to Cooperate on Freedom of Navigation in Disputed South China Sea,” VOA News, July 9, 2018. 62 RIMPAC is a U.S.-led, multilateral naval exercise in the Pacific involving naval forces from more than two dozen countries that is held every two years. At DOD’s invitation, China participated in the 2014 and 2016 RIMPAC exercises. DOD had invited China to participate in the 2018 RIMPAC exercise, and China had accepted that invitation. DOD’s statement regarding the withdrawal of the invitation was reprinted in Megan Eckstein, “China Disinvited from Participating in 2018 RIMPAC Exercise,” USNI News, May 23, 2018. See also Gordon Lubold and Jeremy Page, “U.S. Retracts Invitation to China to Participate in Military Exercise,” Wall Street Journal,” Wall Street Journal, May 23, 2018. See also Helene Cooper, “U.S. Disinvites China From Military Exercise Amid Rising Tensions,” New York Times, May 23, 2018; Missy Ryan, “Pentagon Disinvites China from Major Naval Exercise over South China Sea Buildup,” Washington Post, May 23, 2018; James Stavridis, “U.S. Was Right to Give China’s navy the Boot,” Bloomberg, August 2, 2018. 63 Jake Maxwell Watts, “Bolton Warns China Against Limiting Free Passage in South China Sea,” Wall Street Journal, November 13, 2018. 64 See Demetri Sevastopulo and Kathrin Hille, “US Warns China on Aggressive Acts by Fishing Boats and Coast Guard; Navy Chief Says Washington Will Use Military Rules of Engagement to Curb Provocative Behavior,” Financial Times, April 28, 2019. See also Shirley Tay, “US Reportedly Warns China Over Hostile Non-Naval Vessels in South China Sea,” CNBC, April 29, 2019; Ryan Pickrell, “China’s South China Sea Strategy Takes a Hit as the US Navy Threatens to Get Tough on Beijing’s Sea Forces,” Business Insider, April 29, 2019; Tyler Durden, “‘Warning Shot Across The Bow:’ US Warns China On Aggressive Acts By Maritime Militia,” Zero Hedge, April 29, 2019; Ankit Panda, “The US Navy’s Shifting View of China’s Coast Guard and ‘Maritime Militia,’” Diplomat, April 30, 2019; Ryan Pickrell, “It Looks Like the US Has Been Quietly Lowering the Threshold for Conflict in the South China Sea,” Business Insider, June 19, 2019. 65 State Department, Remarks With Philippine Foreign Secretary Teodoro Locsin, Jr., Remarks [by] Michael R. Pompeo, Secretary of State, March 1, 2019, accessed August 21, 2019 at https://www.state.gov/remarks-with-philippine-foreign-secretary-teodoro-locsin-jr/. See also Regine Cabato and Shibani Mahtani, “Pompeo Promises Intervention If Philippines Is Attacked in South China Sea Amid Rising Chinese Militarization,” Washington Post, February 28, 2019; Claire Jiao and Nick Wadhams, “We Have Your Back in South China Sea, U.S. Assures U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 22 Reported FON Operations and Taiwan Strait Transits In addition to conducting FON operations in the Spratly and Paracel islands, U.S. Navy ships (and more recently at least one U.S. Coast Guard cutter) have steamed through the Taiwan Strait on a recurring basis.66 As mentioned earlier, FON operations can directly support a general U.S. goal of defending principle of freedom of the seas, but might support other U.S. goals only indirectly, marginally, or not at all.67 Table 2 shows reported U.S. Navy FON operations during the Trump Administration; Table 3 shows reported annual numbers of U.S. Navy FON operations in the SCS and Taiwan Strait transits since 2014. Note that the data in these two tables do not entirely agree: Table 2 shows four reported FON operations in the SCS in 2017, while Table 3 shows six for that year, and Table 2 shows eight reported FON operations in the SCS in 2019, while Table 3 shows seven for that year (perhaps because the data for Table 3 treat the actions of November 20 and 21, 2019, as being part of a single FON operation rather than two separate FON operations). In general, China has objected each U.S. Navy FON operation in the SCS and has stated that it sent Chinese Navy ships and/or aircraft to warn the U.S. Navy ships to leave the areas in question. The FON operation conducted on September 30, 2018, led to an intense encounter, discussed elsewhere in this report, between the U.S. Navy ship that conducted the operation (the USS Decatur [DDG-73]) and the Chinese Navy ship that was sent to warn it off.68 Philippines,” Bloomberg, February 28 (updated March 1), 2019; Jake Maxwell Watts and Michael R. Gordon, “Pompeo Pledges to Defend Philippine Forces in South China Sea, Philippines Shelves Planned Review of Military Alliance After U.S. Assurances,” Wall Street Journal, March 1, 2019; Jim Gomez, “Pompeo: US to Make Sure China Can’t Blockade South China Sea,” Associated Press, March 1, 2019; Karen Lema and Neil Jerome Morales, “Pompeo Assures Philippines of U.S. Protection in Event of Sea Conflict, Reuters, March 1, 2019; Raissa Robles, “US Promises to Defend the Philippines from ‘Armed Attack’ in South China Sea, as Manila Mulls Review of Defence Ttreaty,” South China Morning Post, March 1, 2019; Raul Dancel, “US Will Defend Philippines in South China Sea: Pompeo,” Straits Times, March 2, 2019; Ankit Panda, “In Philippines, Pompeo Offers Major Alliance Assurance on South China Sea,” Diplomat, March 4, 2019; Mark Nevitt, “The US-Philippines Defense Treaty and the Pompeo Doctrine on South China Sea,” Just Security, March 11, 2019; Zack Cooper, “The U.S. Quietly Made a Big Splash about the South China Sea; Mike Pompeo Just Reaffirmed Washington Has Manila’s back,” Washington Post, March 19, 2019. 66 See, for example, Staff writer, “US Warship Transits Strait for Second Time This month,” Taipei Times, April 25, 2020; Ben Blanchard and Idrees Ali, “U.S. Warship Sails Through Taiwan Strait, Second Time in a Month,” Reuters, April 23, 2020; Ben Blanchard, “U.S. Playing Dangerous Game, China Says, After Warship Sails Through Taiwan Strait,” Reuters, March 25, 2020; Iain Marlow and Adela Lin, “U.S. Warship Sails Taiwan Strait After Trade Deal, Election,” Bloomberg, January 17, 2020; Ben Blanchard, “U.S. Warship transits Taiwan Strait Less Than Week After Election,” Reuters, January 16, 2020; Caitlin Doornbos, “Navy Sends Guided-Missile Cruiser Through Taiwan Strait in Eighth Transit There This Year,” Stars and Stripes, November 13, 2019; Lucas Tomlinson, “US Warship Sails Through Taiwan Strait in Message to China,” Fox News, November 12, 2019. 67 For a discussion bearing on this issue, see, for example, Zack Cooper and Gregory Poling, “America’s Freedom of Navigation Operations Are Lost at Sea, Far Wider Measures Are Needed to Challenge Beijing’s Maritime Aggression,” Foreign Policy, January 8, 2019. See also John Grady, “U.S. Indo-Pacific Diplomacy Efforts Hinge On FONOPS, Humanitarian Missions,” USNI News, December 4, 2019. 68 For the discussion of this tense encounter, see the paragraph ending in footnote 92 and the citations at that footnote. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 23 Table 2. Reported FON Operations in SCS During Trump Administration Details shown are based on press reports Date Location in SCS U.S. Navy Ship Notes May 25, 2017 Mischief Reef in Spratly Islands Dewey (DDG-105) July 2, 2017 Triton Island in Paracel Islands Stethem (DDG-63) August 10, 2017 Mischief Reef in Spratly Islands John S. McCain (DDG-56) October 10, 2017 Paracel Islands Chaffee (DDG-90) January 17, 2018 Mischeif Reef in Spratly Islands Hopper (DDG-70) March 23, 2018 Mischeif Reef in Spratly Islands Mustin (DDG-89) May 27, 2018 Tree, Lincoln, Triton, and Woody islands in Paracel Islands Antietam (CG-54) and Higgins (DDG-76) The U.S. Navy reportedly considers that the Chinese warships sent to warn off the U.S. Navy ships maneuvered in a “safe but unprofessional” manner. September 30, 2018 Gaven and Johnson Reefs in Spratly Islands Decatur (DDG-73) This operation led to a tense encounter between the Decatur and a Chinese destroyer. November 26, 2018 Paracel Islands Chancellorsville (CG-62) January 7, 2019 Tree, Lincoln, and Woody islands in Paracel Islands McCampbell (DDG-85) February 11, 2019 Mischief Reef in Spratly Islands Spruance (DDG-111) and Preble (DDG-88) May 6, 2019 Gaven and Johnson Reefs in Spratly Islands Preble (DDG-88) and Chung Hoon (DDG-93) May 19, 2019 Scarborough Shoal in Spratly Islands Preble (DDG-88) August 28, 2019 Fiery Cross Reef and Mischief Reef in Spratly Islands Wayne E. Meyer (DDG-108) September 13, 2019 Paracel Islands Wayne E. Meyer (DDG-108) November 20, 2019 Mischief Reef in Spratly Islands Gabrielle Giffords (LCS-10) November 21, 2019 Paracel Islands Wayne E. Meyer (DDG-108) January 25, 2020 Spratly Islands Montgomery (LCS-8) March 10, 2020 Paracel Islands McCampbell (DDG-85) April 28, 2020 Paracel Islands Barry (DDG-52) April 29, 2020 Gaven Reef in Spratly Islands Bunker Hill (CG-52) Source: Table prepared by CRS based on press reports about each operation. Notes: Reported dates may vary by one day due to the difference in time zones between the United States and the SCS. Regarding the entry for March 10, 2020, a press report on China’s state-controlled media states: “Since late January, US warships have travelled within 12 nautical miles of the South China Sea islands in Chinese territory five separate times. Three instances happened close to one another on March 10, 13, and 15.” (Cheng Hanping, “US Steps Up Maritime Provocations in Attempt to Distract China’s COVID-19 Fight,” Global Times, March 22, 2020.) U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 24 Table 3. Reported Numbers of U.S. Navy SCS FONOPs and Taiwan Strait Transits Year SCS FONOPs Taiwan Strait transits 2014 0 n/a 2015 2 n/a 2016 3 12 2017 6 5 2018 5 3 2019 7 9 Source: For SCS FONOPs: U.S. Navy information as reported in David B. Larter, “In Challenging China’s Claims in the South China Sea, the US Navy Is Getting More Assertive,” Defense News, February 5, 2020; John Power, “US Freedom of Navigation Patrols in South China Sea Hit Record High in 2019,” South China Morning Post, February 5, 2020. For Taiwan Strait transits: David B. Larter, “In Challenging China’s Claims in the South China Sea, the US Navy Is Getting More Assertive,” Defense News, February 5, 2020 Assessing the Trump Administration’s Strategy In assessing whether the Trump Administration’s strategy for competing strategically with China in the SCS and ECS is appropriate and correctly resourced, potential questions that Congress may consider include but are not necessarily limited to the following:  Has the Administration correctly assessed China’s approach to the maritime disputes in the SCS and ECS, and to strengthening its position over time in the SCS?  Has the Administration correctly identified the U.S. goals to be pursued in competing strategically with China in the SCS and ECS? If not, how should the list of U.S. goals be modified?  Are the Administration’s actions correctly aligned with its goals? If different goals should be pursued, what actions should be taken to support them?  Has the Administration correctly incorporated cost-imposing strategies and potential contributions from allies and partners into its strategy? If not, how should the strategy be modified?  Is the Administration requesting an appropriate level of resources for implementing its strategy? If not, how should the level of resources be modified?  How does the Administration’s strategy for competing strategically in the SCS and ECS compare with China’s approach to the maritime disputes in the SCS and ECS, and to strengthening its position over time in the SCS? Some observers have proposed modifying the Trump Administration’s strategy for competing strategically with China in the SCS and ECS. In many (though not all) cases, the proposed modifications involve taking actions that these observers believe would make for a stronger or more effective U.S. strategy. Appendix I presents a bibliography of some recent writings by observers recommending various modifications to the Trump Administration’s strategy. Some observers have questioned whether the Trump Administration is adequately resourcing its strategy for competing strategically with China in the SCS and ECS, particularly in terms of funding for maritime-related security assistance for countries in the region. Funding levels for security assistance to countries in the SCS, they argue, are only a small fraction of funding levels U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 25 for U.S. security assistance recipients in other regions, such as the Middle East. On observer, for example, stated in 2018 that today there is a large and persistent gap between the level of importance the U.S. government has attached to the Indo-Pacific and what annual appropriations continue to prioritize at the State Department and Pentagon. A bipartisan consensus has emerged to the extent that major foreign policy speeches and strategy documents now conclude that the Indo-Pacific is the central organizing principle for the U.S. government, but you would not know it by reading the last two administrations’ budget submissions. If budgets are truly policy, the administration and Congress have a long way to go…. Despite the growing acceptance that the Indo-Pacific and U.S.-Chinese competition represents America’s most pressing long-term challenge, there remains a stark contrast between how the administration and Congress continue to budget for Asian security matters compared to other international issues. This is not to argue that other priorities, such as European Command and countering Russian in Ukraine, are not important. They are and deserve budgetary support. Some will argue that this budgetary emphasis demonstrates a bias towards those theaters at the expense of Asia. There may be some truth to this. Understanding and responding to the Russia threat as well as the terrorism challenge remains a part of America’s national security muscle memory, where support can quickly be galvanized and resources persistently applied. Significant work still needs to be done to translate the emerging understanding of America’s long-term position in the Indo-Pacific by senior leaders and congressional staff into actual shifts in budgetary priority. To be fair, in recent years Congress, with administration support, has taken important actions in the theater, including the creation and funding of the Maritime Security Initiative in 2015, funding of the Palau Compact in 2017, resourcing some of Indo-Pacific Command’s unfunded requirements in 2018, devoting resources for dioxin remediation in Vietnam, and reorganizing and raising the lending limit for the Overseas Private Investment Corporation as part of the BUILD Act. But the issue remains that the scale of resource commitment to the region continues to fall short of the sizable objectives the U.S. government has set for itself…. Continuing to give other functional issues and regional challenges budgetary priority will not bring about the shift in national foreign policy emphasis that the United States has set for itself. As Washington’s mental map of the Indo-Pacific matures, the next step in implementing this new consensus on China will fall to the administration, elected officials, and senior congressional staff to prioritize resource levels for the region commensurate with the great power competition we find ourselves in.69 Risk of United States Being Drawn into a Crisis or Conflict Some observers remain concerned that maritime territorial disputes in the ECS and SCS could lead to a crisis or conflict between China and a neighboring country such as Japan or the Philippines, and that the United States could be drawn into such a crisis or conflict as a result of obligations the United States has under bilateral security treaties with Japan and the Philippines. Regarding this issue, potential oversight questions for Congress include the following:  Have U.S. officials taken appropriate and sufficient steps to help reduce the risk of maritime territorial disputes in the SCS and ECS escalating into conflicts?  Do the United States and Japan have a common understanding of potential U.S. actions under Article IV of the U.S.-Japan Treaty on Mutual Cooperation and Security (see Appendix B) in the event of a crisis or conflict over the Senkaku 69 Eric Sayers, “Assessing America’s Indo-Pacific Budget Shortfall,” War on the Rocks, November 15, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 26 Islands? What steps has the United States taken to ensure that the two countries share a common understanding?  Do the United States and the Philippines have a common understanding of how the 1951 U.S.-Philippines mutual defense treaty applies to maritime territories in the SCS that are claimed by both China and the Philippines, and of potential U.S. actions under Article IV of the treaty (see Appendix B) in the event of a crisis or conflict over the territories? What steps has the United States taken to ensure that the two countries share a common understanding?70  Aside from public statements, what has the United States communicated to China regarding potential U.S. actions under the two treaties in connection with maritime territorial disputes in the SCS and ECS?  Has the United States correctly balanced ambiguity and explicitness in its communications to various parties regarding potential U.S. actions under the two defense treaties?  How do the two treaties affect the behavior of Japan, the Philippines, and China in managing their territorial disputes? To what extent, for example, would they help Japan or the Philippines resist potential Chinese attempts to resolve the disputes through intimidation, or, alternatively, encourage risk-taking or brinksmanship behavior by Japan or the Philippines in their dealings with China on the disputes? To what extent do they deter or limit Chinese assertiveness or aggressiveness in their dealings with Japan the Philippines on the disputes?  Has the DOD adequately incorporated into its planning crisis and conflict scenarios arising from maritime territorial disputes in the SCS and ECS that fall under the terms of the two treaties? Whether United States Should Ratify UNCLOS Another issue for Congress—particularly the Senate—is how competing strategically with China in the SCS and ECS might affect the question of whether the United States should become a party to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).71 UNCLOS and an associated 1994 agreement relating to implementation of Part XI of the treaty (on deep seabed mining) were transmitted to the Senate on October 6, 1994.72 In the absence of Senate advice and 70 As mentioned earlier, on March 1, 2019, Secretary of State Michael Pompeo stated that “As the South China Sea is part of the Pacific, any armed attack on Philippine forces, aircraft, or public vessels in the South China Sea will trigger mutual defense obligations under Article 4 of our Mutual Defense Treaty [with the Philippines].” For citations, see footnote 65. For articles bearing more generally on this issue, see, for example, Jason Gutierrez, “Philippine Official, Fearing War With China, Seeks Review of U.S. Treaty,” New York Times, March 5, 2019; Jim Gomez (Associated Press), “Philippines Frets about War at Sea for US, Navy Times, March 5, 2019; Rigoberto D. Tiglao, “US Will Defend PH in a South China Sea War? Don’t Bet on It,” Manila Times, March 4, 2019; Richard Javad Heydarian, “U.S. Ambiguity Is Pushing the Philippines Toward China,” National Interest, February 8, 2019; Richard Heydarian, “How Washington’s Ambiguity in South China Sea Puts the Philippine-US Alliance at a Crossroads,” South China Morning Post, January 31, 2019; Gregory Poling and Eric Sayers, “Time to Make Good on the U.S.-Philippine Alliance,” War on the Rocks, January 21, 2019; Malcolm Cook, “Philippine Alliance Angst,” Interpreter, January 18, 2019; Raissa Robles, “Philippine Defence Chief Urges Review of US Treaty Amid South China Sea Tensions,” South China Morning Post, January 17, 2019; Patrick N. Cronin and Richard Javad Heydarian, “This Is How America and the Philippines Can Upgrade Their Alliance,” National Interest, November 12, 2018; Agence France-Presse, “US Will Be ‘Good Ally’ to Philippines if China Invades, Defence Official Promises,” South China Morning Post,” August 17, 2018. 71 For additional background information on UNCLOS, see Appendix B. 72 Treaty Document 103-39. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 27 consent to adherence, the United States is not a party to UNCLOS or the associated 1994 agreement. During the 112th Congress, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee held four hearings on the question of whether the United States should become a party to the treaty on May 23, June 14 (two hearings), and June 28, 2012. Supporters of the United States becoming a party to UNCLOS argue or might argue one or more of the following:  The treaty’s provisions relating to navigational rights, including those in EEZs, reflect the U.S. position on the issue; becoming a party to the treaty would help lock the U.S. perspective into permanent international law.  Becoming a party to the treaty would give the United States greater standing for participating in discussions relating to the treaty—a “seat at the table”—and thereby improve the U.S. ability to call on China to act in accordance with the treaty’s provisions, including those relating to navigational rights, and to defend U.S. interpretations of the treaty’s provisions, including those relating to whether coastal states have a right under UNCLOS to regulate foreign military activities in their EEZs.73  At least some of the ASEAN member states want the United States to become a member of UNCLOS, because they view it as the principal framework for resolving maritime territorial disputes.  Relying on customary international law to defend U.S. interests in these issues is not sufficient, because it is not universally accepted and is subject to change over time based on state practice.74 Opponents of the United States becoming a party to UNCLOS argue or might argue one or more of the following:  China’s ability to cite international law (including UNCLOS) in defending its position on whether coastal states have a right to regulate foreign military activities in their EEZs75 shows that UNCLOS does not adequately protect U.S. interests relating to navigational rights in EEZs; the United States should not help lock this inadequate description of navigational rights into permanent international law by becoming a party to the treaty.  The United States becoming a party to the treaty would do little to help resolve maritime territorial disputes in the SCS and ECS, in part because China’s maritime territorial claims, such as those depicted in the map of the nine-dash line, predate and go well beyond what is allowed under the treaty and appear rooted in arguments that are outside the treaty.  The United States can adequately support the ASEAN countries and Japan in matters relating to maritime territorial disputes in the SCS and ECS in other ways, without becoming a party to the treaty. 73 See, for example, Andrew Browne, “A Hole in the U.S. Approach to Beijing,” Wall Street Journal, May 20, 2014. 74 See, for example, Patricia Kine, “Signing Treaty Would Bolster US Against China, Russia Seapower: Lawmaker,” Military.com, January 16, 2019. 75 For a discussion of China’s legal justifications for its position on the EEZ issue, see, for example, Peter Dutton, “Three Disputes and Three Objectives,” Naval War College Review, Autumn 2011: 54-55. See also Isaac B. Kardon, “The Enabling Role of UNCLOS in PRC Maritime Policy,” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative (Center for Strategic & International Studies), September 11, 2015. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 28  The United States can continue to defend its positions on navigational rights on the high seas by citing customary international law, by demonstrating those rights with U.S. naval deployments (including those conducted under the FON program), and by having allies and partners defend the U.S. position on the EEZ issue at meetings of UNCLOS parties.76 Legislative Activity in 2019 FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 2500/S. 1790) House H.R. 2500 was reported by the House Armed Services Committee (H.Rept. 116-120) on June 19, 2019) and passed by the House, 220-197, on July 12, 2019. Section 1241 of H.R. 2500 as passed by the House states the following: SEC. 1241. Modification of Indo-Pacific Maritime Security Initiative. (a) Types of assistance and training.—Subsection (c)(2)(A) of section 1263 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (10 U.S.C. 2282 note) is amended by inserting “the law of armed conflict, the rule of law, and” after “respect for”. (b) Notice to Congress on assistance and training.—Subsection (g)(1) of such section is amended— (1) in subparagraph (A), by inserting at the end before the period the following: “, the specific unit or units whose capacity to engage in activities under a program of assistance or training to be provided under subsection (a) will be built under the program, and the amount, type, and purpose of the support to be provided”; (2) by redesignating subparagraph (F) as subparagraph (J); and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following new subparagraphs: “(F) Information, including the amount, type, and purpose, on assistance and training provided under subsection (a) during the three preceding fiscal years, if applicable. “(G) A description of the elements of the theater campaign plan of the geographic combatant command concerned and the interagency integrated country strategy that will be advanced by the assistance and training provided under subsection (a). “(H) A description of whether assistance and training provided under subsection (a) could be provided pursuant to— “(i) section 333 of title 10, United States Code, or other security cooperation authorities of the Department of Defense; or “(ii) security cooperation authorities of the Department of State. “(I) An identification of each such authority described in subparagraph (H).”. (c) Annual monitoring reports.—Such section is amended— (1) by redesignating subsection (h) as subsection (j); and 76 For an article providing general arguments against the United States becoming a party to UNCLOS, see Ted Bromund, James Carafano, and Brett Schaefer, “7 Reasons US Should Not Ratify UN Convention on the Law of the Sea,” Daily Signal, June 2, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 29 (2) by inserting after subsection (g) the following new subsection: “(h) Annual monitoring reports.— “(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than December 31, 2019, and annually thereafter, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report setting forth, for the preceding calendar year, the following: “(A) Information, by recipient foreign country, on the status of funds allocated for assistance and training provided under subsection (a), including funds allocated but not yet obligated or expended. “(B) Information, by recipient foreign country, on the delivery and use of assistance and training provided under subsection (a). “(C) Information, by recipient foreign country, on the timeliness of delivery of assistance and training provided under subsection (a) as compared to the timeliness of delivery of assistance and training previously provided to the foreign country under subsection (a). “(2) APPROPRIATE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS DEFINED.—In this subsection, the term ‘appropriate committees of Congress’ has the meaning given the term in subsection (g)(2).”. (d) Limitations.—Such section, as so amended, is further amended by inserting after subsection (h), as added by subsection (c)(2), the following: “(i) Limitations.— “(1) ASSISTANCE OTHERWISE PROHIBITED BY LAW.—The Secretary of Defense may not use the authority in subsection (a) to provide any type of assistance or training that is otherwise prohibited by any provision of law. “(2) PROHIBITION ON ASSISTANCE TO UNITS THAT HAVE COMMITTED GROSS VIOLATIONS OF HUMAN RIGHTS.—The provision of assistance and training pursuant to a program under subsection (a) shall be subject to the provisions of section 362 of title 10, United States Code. “(3) ASSESSMENT, MONITORING, AND EVALUATION OF PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES.—The provision of assistance and training pursuant to a program under subsection (a) shall be subject to the provisions of section 383 of title 10, United States Code.”. (e) Report.— (1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than January 31, 2020, the Secretary of Defense, with the concurrence of the Secretary of State, shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on the implementation of the Indo-Pacific Maritime Security Initiative under section 1263 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016, as amended by this section. (2) MATTERS TO BE INCLUDED.—The report required by paragraph (1) shall include the following: (A) Objectives of the Initiative, including— (i) a discussion of United States security requirements that are satisfied or enhanced under the Initiative; and (ii) an assessment of progress toward each such objective and the metrics used to assess such progress. (B) A discussion of how the Initiative relates to, complements, or overlaps with other United States security cooperation and security assistance authorities. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 30 (C) A description of the process and criteria by which the utilization of each such authority or authorities described in subparagraph (B) is determined. (D) An assessment, by recipient foreign country, of— (i) the country’s capabilities relating to maritime security and maritime domain awareness; (ii) the country’s capability enhancement priorities, including how such priorities relate to the theater campaign strategy, country plan, and theater campaign plan relating to maritime security and maritime domain awareness; (E) A discussion, by recipient foreign country, of— (i) priority capabilities that the Department of Defense plans to enhance under the Initiative and priority capabilities the Department plans to enhance under separate United States security cooperation and security assistance authorities; and (ii) the anticipated timeline for assistance and training for each such capability. (F) Information, by recipient foreign country, on the delivery and use of assistance and training provided under the Initiative. (G) Any other matters the Secretary of Defense determines should be included. (3) FORM.—The report required by paragraph (1) shall be submitted in unclassified form without any designation relating to dissemination control, but may include a classified annex. (4) DEFINITION.—In this section, the term “appropriate congressional committees” means— (A) the congressional defense committees; and (B) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives. Section 1247 of H.R. 2500 as passed by the House states the following: SEC. 1247. Modification of annual report on military and security developments involving the People’s Republic of China. (a) Annual report.—Subsection (a) of section 1202 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000 (10 U.S.C. 113 note) is amended by inserting “, in consultation with the heads of other Federal departments and agencies as appropriate,” after “the Secretary of Defense”. (b) Matters to be included.—Subsection (b) of such section is amended by adding at the end the following: “(29) Developments relating to the China Coast Guard (in this paragraph referred to as the ‘CCG’), including an assessment of— “(A) how the change in the CCG’s command structure to report to China’s Central Military Commission affects the CCG’s status as a law enforcement entity; “(B) the implications of the CCG’s command structure with respect to the use of the CCG as a coercive tool in ‘gray zone’ activity in the East China Sea and the South China Sea; and “(C) how the change in the CCG’s command structure may affect interactions between the CCG and the United States Navy. “(30) An assessment of the nature of Chinese military relations with Russia, including what strategic objectives China and Russia share and are acting on, and on what objectives they misalign. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 31 “(31) An assessment of— “(A) China’s expansion of its surveillance state; “(B) any correlation of such expansion with its oppression of its citizens and its threat to United States national security interests around the world; and “(C) an overview of the extent to which such surveillance corresponds to the overall respect, or lack thereof, for human rights.”. (c) Specified congressional committees.—Subsection (c) of such section is amended— (1) in paragraph (1), by striking “and the Committee on Foreign Relations” and inserting “, the Committee on Foreign Relations, and the Select Committee on Intelligence”; and (2) in paragraph (2), by striking “and the Committee on International Relations” and inserting “, the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence”. Conference In the conference report (H.Rept. 116-333 of December 9, 2019) on S. 1790, Section 1251 states SEC. 1251. MODIFICATION OF INDO-PACIFIC MARITIME SECURITY INITIATIVE. (a) Types of Assistance and Training.—Subsection (c)(2)(A) of section 1263 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (10 U.S.C. 2282 note) is amended by inserting ``the law of armed conflict, the rule of law, and’’ after ``respect for’’. (b) Notice to Congress on Assistance and Training.—Subsection (g)(1) of such section is amended— (1) in subparagraph (A), by inserting at the end before the period the following: ``, the specific unit or units whose capacity to engage in activities under a program of assistance or training to be provided under subsection (a) will be built under the program, and the amount, type, and purpose of the support to be provided’”; (2) by redesignating subparagraph (F) as subparagraph (J); and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following new subparagraphs: ``(F) Information, including the amount, type, and purpose, on assistance and training provided under subsection (a) during the three preceding fiscal years, if applicable. ``(G) A description of the elements of the theater campaign plan of the geographic combatant command concerned and the interagency integrated country strategy that will be advanced by the assistance and training provided under subsection (a). ``(H) A description of whether assistance and training provided under subsection (a) could be provided pursuant to— ``(i) section 333 of title 10, United States Code, or other security cooperation authorities of the Department of Defense; or ``(ii) security cooperation authorities of the Department of State. `(I) An identification of each such authority described in subparagraph (H).’’. (c) Annual Monitoring Reports.—Such section is amended— (1) by redesignating subsection (h) as subsection (j); and (2) by inserting after subsection (g) the following new subsection: U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 32 ``(h) Annual Monitoring Reports.— ``(1) In general.—Not later than March 1, 2020, and annually thereafter, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report setting forth, for the preceding calendar year, the following: ``(A) An assessment, by recipient foreign country, of— ``(i) the country’s capabilities relating to maritime security and maritime domain awareness; ``(ii) the country’s capability enhancement priorities, including how such priorities relate to the theater campaign strategy, country plan, and theater campaign plan relating to maritime security and maritime domain awareness; ``(B) A discussion, by recipient foreign country, of— ``(i) priority capabilities that the Department of Defense plans to enhance under the authority under subsection (a) and priority capabilities the Department plans to enhance under separate United States security cooperation and security assistance authorities; and ``(ii) the anticipated timeline for assistance and training for each such capability. ``(C) Information, by recipient foreign country, on the status of funds allocated for assistance and training provided under subsection (a), including funds allocated but not yet obligated or expended. ``(D) Information, by recipient foreign country, on the delivery and use of assistance and training provided under subsection (a). ``(E) Information, by recipient foreign country, on the timeliness of the provision of assistance and training under subsection (a) as compared to the timeliness of the provision of assistance and training previously provided to the foreign country under subsection (a). ``(F) A description of the reasons the Department of Defense chose to utilize the authority for assistance and training under subsection (a) in the preceding calendar year. ``(G) An explanation of any impediments to timely obligation or expenditure of funds allocated for assistance and training under subsection (a) or any significant delay in the delivery of such assistance and training. ``(2) Appropriate committees of congress defined.—In this subsection, the term `appropriate committees of Congress’ has the meaning given the term in subsection (g)(2).’’. (d) Limitation.—Such section, as so amended, is further amended by inserting after subsection (h), as added by subsection (c)(2), the following: ``(i) Limitation.—The provision of assistance and training pursuant to a program under subsection (a) shall be subject to the provisions of section 383 of title 10, United States Code.’’. Regarding Section 1251, H.Rept. 116-333 states Modification of Indo-Pacific Maritime Security Initiative (sec. 1251) The House amendment contained a provision (sec. 1241) that would modify the authority for the Indo-Pacific Maritime Security Initiative to include additional elements of assistance and training, require additional information for congressional notifications, mandate an annual report, and incorporate an assessment, monitoring, and evaluation program. The provision would also require a one-time report on the initiative. The Senate bill contained no similar provision. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 33 The Senate recedes with an amendment that would, among other modifications, make clarifying changes to the required annual report on the initiative and strike the requirement for a one-time report. The conferees note that units to receive assistance under the Indo-Pacific Maritime Security Initiative undergo required “Leahy Law” human rights vetting before such assistance is provided. Section 1252 of H.Rept. 116-333 states SEC. 1252. EXPANSION OF INDO-PACIFIC MARITIME SECURITY INITIATIVE AND LIMITATION ON USE OF FUNDS. (a) Expansion of Recipient Countries.—Subsection (b) of section 1263 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (10 U.S.C. 333 note) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(8) The Federated States of Micronesia. ``(9) The Independent State of Samoa. ``(10) The Kingdom of Tonga. ``(11) Papua New Guinea. ``(12) The Republic of Fiji. ``(13) The Republic of Kiribati. ``(14) The Republic of the Marshall Islands. ``(15) The Republic of Nauru. ``(16) The Republic of Palau. ``(17) The Republic of Vanuatu. ``(18) The Solomon Islands. ``(19) Tuvalu.’’. (b) Limitation on Use of Funds.— (1) In general.—None of the funds authorized to be appropriated for the Indo-Pacific Maritime Security Initiative under such section may be obligated or expended to provide training or assistance to a recipient country described in any of paragraphs (8) through (19) of subsection (b) of such section until the date on which the Secretary of Defense, with the concurrence of the Secretary of State, submits to the appropriate committees of Congress a report on security cooperation with and security assistance to such countries. (2) Report.—The report referred to in paragraph (1) shall include the following: (A) An identification of elements of the theater campaign plan of the geographic combatant command concerned and the interagency integrated country strategy that will be advanced by expansion of security cooperation and assistance programs and activities to such recipient countries. (B) An assessment of the capabilities, and a description of the capability enhancement priorities, of each such country. (C) A description of the manner in which United States security cooperation and assistance authorities, including assistance provided pursuant to other security cooperation authorities of the Department of Defense or security assistance authorities of the Department of State, may be used to enhance the priority capabilities of each such country. (D) A description, as appropriate, of the manner in which the Secretary of Defense, together with the Secretary of State, shall ensure that security cooperation with and security U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 34 assistance to such countries complement regional engagement efforts undertaken by United States allies, including the Pacific Step-Up efforts of the Government of Australia and the ``Pacific Reset’’ efforts of the Government of New Zealand. (E) A description of absorption capacity and sustainability issues for each such country and a plan to resolve such issues. (F) An identification of the estimated annual cost for such assistance and training for fiscal years 2020 through 2025. (c) Appropriate Committees of Congress Defined.—In this section, the term ``appropriate committees of Congress’’ means— (1) the congressional defense committees; (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Subcommittee on State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs of the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate; and (3) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Subcommittee on State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives. Section 1258 of H.Rept. 116-333 states SEC. 1258. STATEMENT OF POLICY AND SENSE OF CONGRESS ON, AND STRATEGY TO FULFILL OBLIGATIONS UNDER, MUTUAL DEFENSE TREATY WITH THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES. (a) Statement of Policy.—It is the policy of the United States that— (1) while the United States has long adopted an approach that takes no position on the ultimate disposition of the disputed sovereignty claims in the South China Sea, disputing states should— (A) resolve their disputes peacefully without the threat or use of force; and (B) ensure that their maritime claims are consistent with international law; and (2) an armed attack on the armed forces, public vessels, or aircraft of the Republic of the Philippines in the Pacific, including the South China Sea, would trigger the mutual defense obligations of the United States under Article IV of the Mutual Defense Treaty ``to meet common dangers in accordance with its constitutional processes’’. (b) Sense of Congress.—It is the sense of Congress that the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense should— (1) affirm the commitment of the United States to the Mutual Defense Treaty; (2) preserve and strengthen the military alliance of the United States with the Republic of the Philippines; (3) prioritize efforts to develop a shared understanding of alliance commitments and defense planning; and (4) provide appropriate support to the Republic of the Philippines to strengthen the self-defense capabilities of the Republic of the Philippines, particularly in the maritime domain. (c) Strategy Required.— (1) In general.—Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the Secretary of State, shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report that sets forth the strategy of the Department of Defense for achieving the objectives described in subsection (b). U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 35 (2) Elements of strategy.—The strategy required by paragraph (1) shall include the following: (A) A description of the national security interests and objectives of the United States furthered by the Mutual Defense Treaty. (B) A description of the regional security environment, including— (i) an assessment of threats to both the United States and the Republic of the Philippines national security interests in the region and the role of the Department in addressing such threats; (ii) a description of the strategic security challenges that are detrimental to regional peace and global stability, including challenges posed by the People’s Republic of China, violent extremist organizations, and natural disasters; and (iii) a description of each violent extremist organization that presents a threat to the Republic of the Philippines, including, with respect to each such organization— (I) the primary objectives of the organization; (II) an assessment of— (aa) the capacity and capability of the organization; (bb) the transnational threat posed by the organization; (cc) recent trends in the capability and influence of the organization; (dd) the potential for the organization to reconstitute, expand, or otherwise pose a significant transnational threat; and (ee) the conditions that contribute to efforts of the organization to reconstitute, expand, or pose such a threat; and (III) a description of the metrics used to assess the capability and influence of the organization. (C) A description of Department objectives with the Republic of the Philippines, including— (i) the benchmarks for assessing progress towards such objectives; and (ii) the Department strategy to achieve such objectives, including through— (I) defense cooperation; (II) use of security cooperation authorities; and (III) other support or activities in the Republic of the Philippines. (D) An identification of all current and planned Department resources, programs, and activities to support the strategy required by paragraph (1), including a review of the necessity of an ongoing named operation and the criteria used to determine such necessity. (d) Definitions.—In this section: (1) Appropriate committees of congress.—The term ``appropriate committees of Congress’’ means— (A) the congressional defense committees; and (B) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 36 (2) Mutual defense treaty.—The term ``Mutual Defense Treaty’’ means the Mutual Defense Treaty between the Republic of the Philippines and the United States of America, done at Washington August 30, 1951. Section 1260 of H.Rept. 116-333 states in part: SEC. 1260. MODIFICATION OF ANNUAL REPORT ON MILITARY AND SECURITY DEVELOPMENTS INVOLVING THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA. (a) Modification to Annual Report Requirements.—Section 1202 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000 (10 U.S.C. 113 note) is amended as follows: … (2) In subsection (b)— … (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(29) Developments relating to the China Coast Guard, including an assessment of— ``(A) how the change in the Guard’s command structure to report to China’s Central Military Commission affects the Guard’s status as a law enforcement entity; ``(B) the implications of such command structure with respect to the use of the Guard as a coercive tool to conduct `gray zone’ activities in the East China Sea and the South China Sea; and ``(C) how the change in such command structure may affect interactions between the Guard and the United States Navy…. South China Sea and East China Sea Sanctions Act of 2019 (H.R. 3508/S. 1634) House H.R. 3508, a bill “to impose sanctions with respect to the People’s Republic of China in relation to activities in the South China Sea and the East China Sea, and for other purposes,” was introduced on June 26, 2019. Senate S. 1634, a bill “to impose sanctions with respect to the People’s Republic of China in relation to activities in the South China Sea and the East China Sea, and for other purposes,” was introduced on May 23, 2019. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Act of 2019 (S. 987) Senate S. 987, a bill “to implement the recommendations of the U.S.–China Economic and Security Review Commission, and for other purposes,” was introduced on April 2, 2019. Section 8 of S. 987 as introduced requires the Secretaries of Defense and Homeland Security to jointly submit a report on the China Coast Guard (CCG) that includes, among other things, “The implications of the new command structure of the CCG with respect to the use of the CCG as a coercive tool in ‘gray zone’ activity in the East China Sea and the South China Sea.” U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 37 Appendix A. Maritime Territorial and EEZ Disputes in SCS and ECS This appendix provides background information on maritime territorial and EEZ disputes in the SCS and ECS that involve China. Other CRS reports provide additional and more detailed information on these disputes.77 Maritime Territorial Disputes China is a party to multiple maritime territorial disputes in the SCS and ECS, including in particular the following (see Figure A-1 for locations of the island groups listed below):  a dispute over the Paracel Islands in the SCS, which are claimed by China and Vietnam, and occupied by China;  a dispute over the Spratly Islands in the SCS, which are claimed entirely by China, Taiwan, and Vietnam, and in part by the Philippines, Malaysia, and Brunei, and which are occupied in part by all these countries except Brunei;  a dispute over Scarborough Shoal in the SCS, which is claimed by China, Taiwan, and the Philippines, and controlled since 2012 by China; and  a dispute over the Senkaku Islands in the ECS, which are claimed by China, Taiwan, and Japan, and administered by Japan. The island and shoal names used above are the ones commonly used in the United States; in other countries, these islands are known by various other names.78 These island groups are not the only land features in the SCS and ECS—the two seas feature other islands, rocks, and shoals, as well as some near-surface submerged features. The territorial status of some of these other features is also in dispute.79 There are additional maritime territorial disputes in the Western Pacific that do not involve China.80 Maritime territorial disputes in the SCS and ECS date back many years, and have periodically led to diplomatic tensions as well as confrontations and incidents at sea involving fishing vessels, oil exploration vessels and oil rigs, coast guard ships, naval ships, and military aircraft.81 77 See CRS In Focus IF10607, South China Sea Disputes: Background and U.S. Policy, by Ben Dolven, Susan V. Lawrence, and Ronald O'Rourke; CRS Report R42930, Maritime Territorial Disputes in East Asia: Issues for Congress, by Ben Dolven, Mark E. Manyin, and Shirley A. Kan; CRS Report R44072, Chinese Land Reclamation in the South China Sea: Implications and Policy Options, by Ben Dolven et al.; CRS Report R43894, China's Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ), by Ian E. Rinehart and Bart Elias. 78 China, for example, refers to the Paracel Islands as the Xisha islands, to the Spratly Islands as the Nansha islands, to Scarborough Shoal as Huangyan island, and to the Senkaku Islands as the Diaoyu Islands. 79 For example, the Reed Bank, a submerged atoll northeast of the Spratly Islands, is the subject of a dispute between China and the Philippines, and the Macclesfield Bank, a group of submerged shoals and reefs between the Paracel Islands and Scarborough Shoal, is claimed by China, Taiwan, and the Philippines. China refers to the Macclesfield Bank as the Zhongsha islands, even though they are submerged features rather than islands. 80 North Korea and South Korea, for example, have not reached final agreement on their exact maritime border; South Korea and Japan are involved in a dispute over the Liancourt Rocks—a group of islets in the Sea of Japan that Japan refers to as the Takeshima islands and South Korea as the Dokdo islands; and Japan and Russia are involved in a dispute over islands dividing the Sea of Okhotsk from the Pacific Ocean that Japan refers to as the Northern Territories and Russia refers to as the South Kuril Islands. 81 One observer states that “notable incidents over sovereignty include the Chinese attack on the forces of the Republic U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 38 Figure A-1. Maritime Territorial Disputes Involving China Island groups involved in principal disputes Source: Map prepared by CRS using base maps provided by Esri. Note: Disputed islands have been enlarged to make them more visible. of Vietnam [South Vietnam] in the Paracel Islands in 1974, China’s attack on Vietnamese forces near Fiery Cross Reef [in the Spratly Islands] in 1988, and China’s military ouster of Philippines forces from Mischief Reef [also in the Spratly Islands] in 1995.” Peter Dutton, “Three Dispute and Three Objectives,” Naval War College Review, Autumn 2011: 43. A similar recounting can be found in Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, 2011, p. 15. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 39 EEZ Dispute and U.S.-Chinese Incidents at Sea In addition to maritime territorial disputes in the SCS and ECS, China is involved in a dispute, principally with the United States, over whether China has a right under international law to regulate the activities of foreign military forces operating within China’s EEZ. The position of the United States and most other countries is that while the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which established EEZs as a feature of international law, gives coastal states the right to regulate economic activities (such as fishing and oil exploration) within their EEZs, it does not give coastal states the right to regulate foreign military activities in the parts of their EEZs beyond their 12-nautical-mile territorial waters.82 The position of China and some other countries (i.e., a minority group among the world’s nations) is that UNCLOS gives coastal states the right to regulate not only economic activities, but also foreign military activities, in their EEZs. In response to a request from CRS to identify the countries taking this latter position, the U.S. Navy states that countries with restrictions inconsistent with the Law of the Sea Convention [i.e., UNCLOS] that would limit the exercise of high seas freedoms by foreign navies beyond 12 nautical miles from the coast are [the following 27]: Bangladesh, Brazil, Burma, Cambodia, Cape Verde, China, Egypt, Haiti, India, Iran, Kenya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, North Korea, Pakistan, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Thailand, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, and Vietnam.83 Other observers provide different counts of the number of countries that take the position that UNCLOS gives coastal states the right to regulate not only economic activities but also foreign military activities in their EEZs. For example, one set of observers, in an August 2013 briefing, stated that 18 countries seek to regulate foreign military activities in their EEZs, and that 3 of 82 The legal term under UNCLOS for territorial waters is territorial seas. This report uses the more colloquial term territorial waters to avoid confusion with terms like South China Sea and East China Sea. 83 Source: Navy Office of Legislative Affairs email to CRS, June 15, 2012. The email notes that two additional countries—Ecuador and Peru—also have restrictions inconsistent with UNCLOS that would limit the exercise of high seas freedoms by foreign navies beyond 12 nautical miles from the coast, but do so solely because they claim an extension of their territorial sea beyond 12 nautical miles. DOD states that Regarding excessive maritime claims, several claimants within the region have asserted maritime claims along their coastlines and around land features that are inconsistent with international law. For example, Malaysia attempts to restrict foreign military activities within its Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), and Vietnam attempts to require notification by foreign warships prior to exercising the right of innocent passage through its territorial sea. A number of countries have drawn coastal baselines (the lines from which the breadth of maritime entitlements are measured) that are inconsistent with international law, including Vietnam and China, and the United States also has raised concerns with respect to Taiwan’s Law on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone’s provisions on baselines and innocent passage in the territorial sea. Although we applaud the Philippines’ and Vietnam’s efforts to bring its maritime claims in line with the Law of the Sea Convention, more work remains to be done. Consistent with the long-standing U.S. Freedom of Navigation Policy, the United States encourages all claimants to conform their maritime claims to international law and challenges excessive maritime claims through U.S. diplomatic protests and operational activities. (Department of Defense, Asia-Pacific Maritime Security Strategy, undated but released August 2015, pp. 7-8.) U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 40 these countries—China, North Korea, and Peru—have directly interfered with foreign military activities in their EEZs.84 The dispute over whether China has a right under UNCLOS to regulate the activities of foreign military forces operating within its EEZ appears to be at the heart of incidents between Chinese and U.S. ships and aircraft in international waters and airspace, including  incidents in March 2001, September 2002, March 2009, and May 2009, in which Chinese ships and aircraft confronted and harassed the U.S. naval ships Bowditch, Impeccable, and Victorious as they were conducting survey and ocean surveillance operations in China’s EEZ;  an incident on April 1, 2001, in which a Chinese fighter collided with a U.S. Navy EP-3 electronic surveillance aircraft flying in international airspace about 65 miles southeast of China’s Hainan Island in the South China Sea, forcing the EP-3 to make an emergency landing on Hainan Island;85  an incident on December 5, 2013, in which a Chinese navy ship put itself in the path of the U.S. Navy cruiser Cowpens as it was operating 30 or more miles from China’s aircraft carrier Liaoning, forcing the Cowpens to change course to avoid a collision;  an incident on August 19, 2014, in which a Chinese fighter conducted an aggressive and risky intercept of a U.S. Navy P-8 maritime patrol aircraft that was flying in international airspace about 135 miles east of Hainan Island86—DOD characterized the intercept as “very, very close, very dangerous”;87 and  an incident on May 17, 2016, in which Chinese fighters flew within 50 feet of a Navy EP-3 electronic surveillance aircraft in international airspace in the South China Sea—a maneuver that DOD characterized as “unsafe.”88 84 Source: Joe Baggett and Pete Pedrozo, briefing for Center for Naval Analysis Excessive Chinese Maritime Claims Workshop, August 7, 2013, slide entitled “What are other nations’ views?” (slide 30 of 47). The slide also notes that there have been “isolated diplomatic protests from Pakistan, India, and Brazil over military surveys” conducted in their EEZs. 85 For discussions of some of these incidents and their connection to the issue of military operating rights in EEZs, see Raul Pedrozo, “Close Encounters at Sea, The USNS Impeccable Incident,” Naval War College Review, Summer 2009: 101-111; Jonathan G. Odom, “The True ‘Lies’ of the Impeccable Incident: What Really Happened, Who Disregarded International Law, and Why Every Nation (Outside of China) Should Be Concerned,” Michigan State Journal of International Law, vol. 18, no. 3, 2010: 16-22, accessed September 25, 2012, at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1622943; Oriana Skylar Mastro, “Signaling and Military Provocation in Chinese National Security Strategy: A Closer Look at the Impeccable Incident,” Journal of Strategic Studies, April 2011: 219-244; and Peter Dutton, ed., Military Activities in the EEZ, A U.S.-China Dialogue on Security and International Law in the Maritime Commons, Newport (RI), Naval War College, China Maritime Studies Institute, China Maritime Study Number 7, December 2010, 124 pp. See also CRS Report RL30946, China-U.S. Aircraft Collision Incident of April 2001: Assessments and Policy Implications, by Shirley A. Kan et al. 86 Source for location: Transcript of remarks by DOD Press Secretary Rear Admiral John Kirby at August 22, 2014, press briefing, accessed September 26, 2014, at http://www.defense.gov/Transcripts/Transcript.aspx?TranscriptID=5493. Chinese officials stated that the incident occurred 220 kilometers (about 137 statute miles or about 119 nautical miles) from Hainan Island. 87 Source: Transcript of remarks by DOD Press Secretary Rear Admiral John Kirby at August 22, 2014, press briefing, accessed September 26, 2014, at http://www.defense.gov/Transcripts/Transcript.aspx?TranscriptID=5493. 88 See, for example, Michael S. Schmidt, “Chinese Aircraft Fly Within 50 Feet of U.S. Plane Over South China Sea, Pentagon Says,” New York Times, May 18, 2016; Thomas Gibbons-Neff, “Chinese Jets Intercept U.S. Recon Plane, Almost Colliding Over South China Sea,” Washington Post, May 18, 2016; Idrees Ali and Megha Rajagopalan, “Chinese Jets Intercept U.S. Military Plan over South China Sea: Pentagon,” Reuters, May 19, 2016; Jamie Crawford, U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 41 Figure A-2 shows the locations of the 2001, 2002, and 2009 incidents listed in the first two bullets above. The incidents shown in Figure A-2 are the ones most commonly cited prior to the December 2013 involving the Cowpens, but some observers list additional incidents as well.89 Figure A-2. Locations of 2001, 2002, and 2009 U.S.-Chinese Incidents at Sea and In Air Source: Mark E. Redden and Phillip C. Saunders, Managing Sino-U.S. Air and Naval Interactions: Cold War Lessons and New Avenues of Approach, Washington, Center for the Study of Chinese Military Affairs, Institute for National Strategic Studies, National Defense University, September 2012. Detail of map shown on p. 6. “Pentagon: ‘Unsafe’ Intercept over South China Sea,” CNN, May 19, 2016. 89 For example, one set of observers, in an August 2013 briefing, provided the following list of incidents in which China has challenged or interfered with operations by U.S. ships and aircraft and ships from India’s navy: EP-3 Incident (April 2001); USNS Impeccable (March 2009); USNS Victorious (May 2009); USS George Washington (July-November 2010); U-2 Intercept (June 2011); INS [Indian Naval Ship] Airavat (July 2011); INS [Indian Naval Ship] Shivalik (June 2012); and USNS Impeccable (July 2013). (Source: Joe Baggett and Pete Pedrozo, briefing for Center for Naval Analysis Excessive Chinese Maritime Claims Workshop, August 7, 2013, slide entitled “Notable EEZ Incidents with China,” (slides 37 and 46 of 47).) Regarding an event involving the Impeccable reported to have taken place in June rather than July, see William Cole, “Chinese Help Plan For Huge War Game Near Isles,” Honolulu Star-Advertiser, July 25, 2013: 1. See also Bill Gertz, “Inside the Ring: New Naval Harassment in Asia,” July 17, 2013. See also Department of Defense Press Briefing by Adm. Locklear in the Pentagon Briefing Room, July 11, 2013, accessed August 9, 2013, at http://www.defense.gov/transcripts/transcript.aspx?transcriptid=5270. As of September 26, 2014, a video of part of the incident was posted on YouTube at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TiyeUWQObkg. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 42 DOD stated in 2015 that The growing efforts of claimant States to assert their claims has led to an increase in air and maritime incidents in recent years, including an unprecedented rise in unsafe activity by China’s maritime agencies in the East and South China Seas. U.S. military aircraft and vessels often have been targets of this unsafe and unprofessional behavior, which threatens the U.S. objectives of safeguarding the freedom of the seas and promoting adherence to international law and standards. China’s expansive interpretation of jurisdictional authority beyond territorial seas and airspace causes friction with U.S. forces and treaty allies operating in international waters and airspace in the region and raises the risk of inadvertent crisis. There have been a number of troubling incidents in recent years. For example, in August 2014, a Chinese J-11 fighter crossed directly under a U.S. P-8A Poseidon operating in the South China Sea approximately 117 nautical miles east of Hainan Island. The fighter also performed a barrel roll over the aircraft and passed the nose of the P-8A to show its weapons load-out, further increasing the potential for a collision. However, since August 2014, U.S.-China military diplomacy has yielded positive results, including a reduction in unsafe intercepts. We also have seen the PLAN implement agreed-upon international standards for encounters at sea, such as the Code for Unplanned Encounters at Sea (CUES),90 which was signed in April 2014.91 On September 30, 2018, an incident occurred in the SCS between the U.S. Navy destroyer Decatur (DDG-73) and a Chinese destroyer, as the Decatur was conducting a FON operation near Gaven Reef in the Spratly Islands. In the incident, the Chinese destroyer overtook the U.S. destroyer close by on the U.S. destroyer’s port (i.e., left) side, requiring the U.S. destroyer to turn starboard (i.e., to the right) to avoid the Chinese ship. U.S. officials stated that at the point of closest approach between the two ships, the stern (i.e., back end) of the Chinese ship came within 45 yards (135 feet) of the bow (i.e., front end) of the Decatur. As the encounter was in progress, the Chinese ship issued a warning by radio stating, “If you don’t change course your [sic] will suffer consequences.” One observer, commenting on the incident, stated, “To my knowledge, this is the first time we’ve had a direct threat to an American warship with that kind of language.” U.S. officials characterized the actions of the Chinese ship in the incident as “unsafe and unprofessional.”92 A November 3, 2018, press report states the following: 90 For more on the CUES agreement, see “2014 Code for Unplanned Encounters at Sea (CUES)” below. 91 Department of Defense, Asia-Pacific Maritime Security Strategy, undated but released August 2015, pp. 14-15. 92 John Power and Catherine Wong, “Exclusive Details and Footage Emerge of Near Collision Between Warships in South China Sea,” South China Morning Post, November 4, 2018. See also Jane Perlez and Steven Lee Myers, “‘A Game of Chicken’: U.S. and China Are Risking a Clash at Sea,” New York Times, November 8, 2018; Geoff Ziezulewicz, “Video Shows Near Collision of US and Chinese Warships,” Navy Times, November 5, 2018; John Grady, “Panel: Chinese Warships Acting More Aggressively Towards Foreign Navies in the South China Sea,” USNI News, October 16, 2018; Bill Gertz, “Bolton Warns Chinese Military to Halt Dangerous Naval Encounters,” Washington Free Beacon, October 12, 2018; James Holmes, “South China Sea Showdown: What Happens If a U.S. Navy and Chinese Vessel Collide?” National Interest, October 6, 2018; Kristin Huang and Keegan Elmer, “Beijing’s Challenge to US Warship in South China Sea ‘Deliberate and Calculated,’ Observers Say,” South China Morning Post, October 5, 2018; Stacie E. Goddard, “The U.S. and China Are Playing a Dangerous Game. What Comes Next?” Washington Post, October 3, 2018; Brad Lendon, “Photos Show How Close Chinese Warship Came to Colliding with US Destroyer,” CNN, October 3, 2018; Ben Werner, “China’s Atypical Response To US Navy FONOPS May Be a Message to Trump Adminsitration,” USNI News, October 3, 2018; Gordon Lubold and Jeremy Page, “Pentagon Says Chinese Ship Harrassed a U.S. Vessel,” Wall Street Journal, October 1, 2018; Barbara Starr and Ryan Browne, “Chinese Warship in ‘Unsafe’ Encounter with US Destroyer, Amid Rising US-China Tensions,” CNN, October 1, 2018; Ben Werner, “Destroyer USS Decatur Has Close Encounter With Chinese Warship,” USNI News, October 1, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 43 The US Navy has had 18 unsafe or unprofessional encounters with Chinese military forces in the Pacific since 2016, according to US military statistics obtained by CNN. “We have found records of 19 unsafe and/or unprofessional interactions with China and Russia since 2016 (18 with China and one with Russia),” Cmdr. Nate Christensen, a spokesman for the US Pacific Fleet, told CNN. A US official familiar with the statistics told CNN that 2017, the first year of the Trump administration, saw the most unsafe and or unprofessional encounters with Chinese forces during the period. At least three of those incidents took place in February, May and July of that year and involved Chinese fighter jets making what the US considered to be “unsafe” intercepts of Navy surveillance planes. While the 18 recorded incidents only involved US naval forces, the Air Force has also had at least one such encounter during this period…. The US Navy told CNN that, in comparison, there were 50 unsafe or unprofessional encounters with Iranian military forces since 2016, with 36 that year, 14 last year and none in 2018. US and Iranian naval forces tend to operate in relatively narrow stretches of water, such as the Strait of Hormuz, increasing their frequency of close contact.93 DOD states that Although China has long challenged foreign military activities in its maritime zones in a manner that is inconsistent with the rules of customary international law as reflected in the LOSC, the PLA has recently started conducting the very same types of military activities inside and outside the first island chain in the maritime zones of other countries. This contradiction highlights China’s continued lack of commitment to the rules of customary international law. Even though China is a state party to the LOSC [i.e., UNCLOS], China’s domestic laws restrict military activities in its exclusive economic zone (EEZ), including intelligence collection and military surveys, contrary to LOSC. At the same time, the PLA is increasingly undertaking military operations in other countries’ EEZs. The map on the following page [not reproduced here] depicts new PLA operating areas in foreign EEZs since 2014. In 2017, the PLAN conducted air and naval operations in Japan’s EEZ; employed an AGI [intelligence-gathering ship] ship, likely to monitor testing of a THAAD system in the U.S. EEZ near the Aleutian Islands; and employed an AGI ship to monitor a multi-national naval exercise in Australia’s EEZ. PLA operations in foreign EEZs have taken place in Northeast and Southeast Asia, and a growing number of operations are also occurring farther from Chinese shores.94 Relationship of Maritime Territorial Disputes to EEZ Dispute The issue of whether China has the right under UNCLOS to regulate foreign military activities in its EEZ is related to, but ultimately separate from, the issue of territorial disputes in the SCS and ECS: 93 Ryan Browne, “US Navy Has Had 18 Unsafe or Unprofessional Encounters with China since 2016,” CNN, November 3, 2018. See also Kristin Huang, “China Has a History of Playing Chicken with the US Military—Sometimes These Dangerous Games End in Disaster,” Business Insider, October 2, 2018. 94 Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress [on] Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2018, pp. 67-68. See also Christopher Woody, “This New Defense Department Map Shows How China Says One Thing and Does Another with Its Military Operations at Sea,” Business Insider, August 17, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 44  The two issues are related because China can claim EEZs from inhabitable islands over which it has sovereignty, so accepting China’s claims to sovereignty over inhabitable islands in the SCS or ECS could permit China to expand the EEZ zone within which China claims a right to regulate foreign military activities.  The two issues are ultimately separate from one another because even if all the territorial disputes in the SCS and ECS were resolved, and none of China’s claims in the SCS and ECS were accepted, China could continue to apply its concept of its EEZ rights to the EEZ that it unequivocally derives from its mainland coast—and it is in this unequivocal Chinese EEZ that several of the past U.S.-Chinese incidents at sea have occurred. Press reports of maritime disputes in the SCS and ECS sometimes focus on territorial disputes while devoting little or no attention to the EEZ dispute, or do relatively little to distinguish the EEZ dispute from the territorial disputes. From the U.S. perspective, the EEZ dispute is arguably as significant as the maritime territorial disputes because of the EEZ dispute’s proven history of leading to U.S.-Chinese incidents at sea and because of its potential for affecting U.S. military operations not only in the SCS and ECS, but around the world. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 45 Appendix B. U.S. Security Treaties with Japan and Philippines This appendix presents brief background information on the U.S. security treaties with Japan and the Philippines. U.S.-Japan Treaty on Mutual Cooperation and Security The 1960 U.S.-Japan treaty on mutual cooperation and security95 states in Article V that Each Party recognizes that an armed attack against either Party in the territories under the administration of Japan would be dangerous to its own peace and safety and declares that it would act to meet the common danger in accordance with its constitutional provisions and processes. The United States has reaffirmed on a number of occasions over the years that since the Senkaku Islands are under the administration of Japan, they are included in the territories referred to in Article V of the treaty, and that the United States “will honor all of our treaty commitments to our treaty partners.”96 (At the same time, the United States, noting the difference between administration and sovereignty, has noted that such affirmations do not prejudice the U.S. approach of taking no position regarding the outcome of the dispute between China, Taiwan, and Japan regarding who has sovereignty over the islands.) Some observers, while acknowledging the U.S. affirmations, have raised questions regarding the potential scope of actions that the United States might take under Article V.97 U.S.-Philippines Mutual Defense Treaty98 The 1951 U.S.-Philippines mutual defense treaty99 states in Article IV that 95 Treaty of mutual cooperation and security, signed January 19, 1960, entered into force June 23, 1960, 11 UST 1632; TIAS 4509; 373 UNTS. 96 The quoted words are from Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel, in “Media Availability with Secretary Hagel En Route to Japan,” April 5, 2014, accessed April 9, 2014, at http://archive.defense.gov/transcripts/transcript.aspx?transcriptid=5405. See also Associated Press, “US: Will Stand by Allies in Disputes with China,” Military.com, April 3, 2014. 97 See, for example, Yoichiro Sato, “The Senkaku Dispute and the US-Japan Security Treaty,” Pacific Forum CSIS, September 10, 2012 (PacNet #57); James R. Holmes, “Thucydides, Japan and America,” The Diplomat, November 27, 2012; Shigemi Sato, “Japan, U.S. To Discuss Revising Defense Guidelines,” DefenseNews.com (Agence France-Presse), November 11, 2012; Martin Fackler, “Japan Seeks Tighter Pact With U.S. To Confront China,” NYTimes.com, November 9, 2012; “Japan, U.S. To Review Defense Guidelines,” Japan Times, November 11, 2012; “Defense Official To Visit U.S. To Discuss Alliance,” Kyodo News, November 8, 2012; Yuka Hayashi, “U.S. Commander Chides China Over ‘Provocative Act,’” Wall Street Journal, February 16, 2013: 7; Julian E. Barnes, “U.S., Japan Update Plans To Defend Islands,” New York Times, March 20, 2013. See also Kiyoshi Takenaka, “China “Extremely Concerned” About U.S.-Japan Island Talk, Reuters), March 21, 2013; Wendell, Minnick, “Senkakus Could Be Undoing of Asia Pivot,” Defense News, April 15, 2013: 16; Item entitled “U.S. Warns China” in Bill Gertz, “Inside the Ring: NSA Contractor Threat,” Washington Times, June 19, 2013; Anthony Fensom, “Yamaguchi: China Military Build-Up Risks Accident,” The Diplomat, June 21, 2013. 98 For additional discussion of U.S. obligations under the U.S.-Philippines mutual defense treaty, see CRS Report R43498, The Republic of the Philippines and U.S. Interests—2014, by Thomas Lum and Ben Dolven. 99 Mutual defense treaty, signed August 30, 1951, entered into force August 27, 1952, 3 UST 3947, TIAS 2529, 177 UNTS 133. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 46 Each Party recognizes that an armed attack in the Pacific Area on either of the Parties would be dangerous to its own peace and safety and declares that it would act to meet the common dangers in accordance with its constitutional processes. Article V states that For the purpose of Article IV, an armed attack on either of the Parties is deemed to include an armed attack on the metropolitan territory of either of the Parties, or on the island territories under its jurisdiction in the Pacific or on its armed forces, public vessels or aircraft in the Pacific. The United States has reaffirmed on a number of occasions over the years its obligations under the U.S.-Philippines mutual defense treaty.100 On May 9, 2012, Filipino Foreign Affairs Secretary Albert F. del Rosario issued a statement providing the Philippine perspective regarding the treaty’s application to territorial disputes in the SCS.101 U.S. officials have made their own statements regarding the treaty’s application to territorial disputes in the SCS.102 As mentioned earlier, on March 1, 2019, Secretary of State Michael Pompeo stated, “As the South China Sea is part of the Pacific, any armed attack on Philippine forces, aircraft, or public vessels in the South China Sea will trigger mutual defense obligations under Article 4 of our Mutual Defense Treaty [with the Philippines].”103 100 See, for example, the Joint Statement of the United States-Philippines Ministerial Dialogue of April 30, 2012, available at https://2009-2017.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2012/04/188977.htm, which states in part that “the United States and the Republic of the Philippines reaffirm our shared obligations under the Mutual Defense Treaty, which remains the foundation of the U.S.-Philippines security relationship.” See also Associated Press, “US: Will Stand by Allies in Disputes with China,” Military.com, April 3, 2014. 101 Statement of Secretary del Rosario regarding the Philippines-U.S. Mutual Defense Treaty, May 9, 2012, accessed September 20, 2012, at http://www.gov.ph/2012/05/09/statement-of-secretary-del-rosario-regarding-the-philippines-u-s-mutual-defense-treaty-may-9-2012/. 102 See, for example, Agence France-Presse, “Navy Chief: US Would ‘Help’ Philippines In South China Sea,” DefenseNews.com, February 13, 2014; Manuel Mogato, “U.S. Admiral Assures Philippines of Help in Disputed Sea,” Reuters.com, February 13, 2014. 103 For citations, see footnote 65. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 47 Appendix C. Treaties and Agreements Related to the Maritime Disputes This appendix briefly reviews some international treaties and agreements that bear on the issues discussed in this report. UN Convention on Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) Overview of UNCLOS The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) “lays down a comprehensive regime of law and order in the world’s oceans and seas[,] establishing rules governing all uses of the oceans and their resources.”104 It builds on four 1958 law of the sea conventions to which the United States, following Senate consent to ratification, became a party in 1961, and which entered force between 1962 and 1966.105 All four treaties remain in force for the United States.106 UNCLOS was adopted in 1982 as the “culmination of more than 14 years of work involving participation by more than 150 countries representing all regions of the world, all legal and political systems and the spectrum of socio/economic development.”107 The treaty was modified in 1994 by an agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of the treaty, which relates to the seabed and ocean floor and subsoil thereof that are beyond the limits of national jurisdiction. UNCLOS entered into force in November 1994. The treaty established EEZs as a feature of international law, and contains multiple provisions relating to territorial waters and EEZs. As of April 8, 2019, 168 nations were party to the treaty.108 As discussed further in the next section, the United States is not a party to the treaty. 104 United Nations, “United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982, Overview and full text,” updated June 28, 2019, accessed August 2, 2019, at https://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_agreements/convention_overview_convention.htm. 105 These are the Convention on the Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone, which entered into force on September 10, 1964, the Convention on the Continental Shelf, which entered into force on 10 June 10, 1964, the Convention on the High Seas, which entered into force on September 30, 1962, and the Convention on Fishing and Conservation of Living Resources of the High Seas, which entered into force on March 20, 1966. The four 1958 treaties resulted from the first Conference on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS I), which took place in 1958. (For additional discussion, see United Nations, “United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea,” undated, accessed August 2, 2019, at http://legal.un.org/diplomaticconferences/1958_los/, and United Nations, “1958 Geneva Conventions on the Law of the Sea,” undated, accessed August 2, 2019, at http://legal.un.org/avl/ha/gclos/gclos.html.) 106 See Department of State, Treaties in Force, Section 2, Multilateral Treaties in Force as of January 1, 2019, pp. 526, 501, 525, and 516, respectively. 107 United Nations, “United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982, Overview and full text,” updated June 28, 2019, accessed August 2, 2019, at https://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_agreements/convention_overview_convention.htm. More specifically, the treaty resulted from the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS III), which took place between 1973 and 1982. For additional discussion, see United Nations, “Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea,” undated, accessed August 2, 2019, at http://legal.un.org/diplomaticconferences/1973_los/. 108 Chronological lists of ratifications of, accessions and successions to the Convention and the related Agreements as of February 3, 2017, accessed December 13, 2018, at http://www.un.org/Depts/los/reference_files/chronological_lists_of_ratifications.htm#. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 48 U.S. Not a Party to UNCLOS As noted above, the United States is not a party to UNCLOS.109 Although the United States is not a party to UNCLOS, the United States accepts and acts in accordance with the non-seabed mining provisions of the treaty, such as those relating to navigation and overflight, which the United States views as reflecting customary international law of the sea. The United States did not sign UNCLOS when it was adopted in 1982 because the United States objected to the seabed mining provisions of Part XI of the treaty. Certain other countries also expressed concerns about these provisions.110 The United Nations states that “To address certain difficulties with the seabed mining provisions contained in Part XI of the Convention, which had been raised, primarily by the industrialized countries, the Secretary-General convened in July 1990 a series of informal consultations which culminated in the adoption, on 28 July 1994, of the Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982. The Agreement entered into force on 28 July 1996.”111 The United States signed the 1994 agreement on July 29, 1994, and U.S. administrations since then have supported the United States becoming a party to UNCLOS. The United Nations includes the United States on a list of countries for which the 1994 agreement is in a status of “provisional application,” as of November 16, 1994, by virtue of its signature.112 The 1982 treaty and the 1994 agreement were transmitted to the Senate on October 6, 1994, during the 103rd Congress, becoming Treaty Document 103-39. Subsequent Senate action on Treaty Document 103-39, as presented at Congress.gov,113 can be summarized as follows:  In 2004, during the 108th Congress, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee held hearings on Treaty Document 103-39 and reported it favorably with a resolution of advice and consent to ratification with declarations and understandings. No further action was taken during the 108th Congress, and the matter was re-referred to the committee at the sine die adjournment of the 108th Congress.  In 2007, during the 110th Congress, the committee held hearings on Treaty Document 103-39 and reported it favorably with a resolution of advice and consent to ratification with declarations, understandings, and conditions. No 109 The United States is not a signatory to the treaty. On July 29, 1994, the United States became a signatory to the 1994 agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of the treaty. The United States has not ratified either the treaty or the 1994 agreement. 110 In a March 10, 1983, statement on U.S. oceans policy, President Reagan stated, “Last July, I announced that the United States will not sign the United Nations Law of the Sea Convention that was opened for signature on December 10. We have taken this step because several major problems in the Convention's deep seabed mining provisions are contrary to the interests and principles of industrialized nations and would not help attain the aspirations of developing countries. The United States does not stand alone in those concerns. Some important allies and friends have not signed the convention. Even some signatory states have raised concerns about these problems.” (Ronald Reagan Presidential Library & Museum, “Statement on United States Oceans Policy,” undated, accessed August 2, 2019, at https://www.reaganlibrary.gov/research/speeches/31083c.) 111 United Nations, “Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982,” updated September 2, 2016, accessed August 1, 2019, at https://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_agreements/convention_overview_part_xi.htm. 112 United Nations, “Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982,” status as of August 1, 2019, accessed August 1, 2019, at https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=XXI-6-a&chapter=21&clang=_en. 113 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, Senate Consideration of Treaty Document 103-39, accessed July 31, 2019, at https://www.congress.gov/treaty-document/103rd-congress/39. For a timeline of selected key events relating to the treaty, see Department of State, “Law of the Sea Convention,” March 7, 2019, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://www.state.gov/law-of-the-sea-convention/. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 49 further action was taken during the 110th Congress, and the matter was re-referred to the committee at the sine die adjournment of the 110th Congress.  In 2012, during the 112th Congress, the committee held hearings on Treaty Document 103-39. No further action was taken during the 112th Congress. The full Senate to date has not voted on the question of whether to give its advice and consent to ratification of Treaty Document 103-39. The latest Senate action regarding Treaty Document 103-39 recorded at Congress.gov is a hearing held by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on June 28, 2012. 1983 Statement on U.S. Ocean Policy A March 10, 1983, statement on U.S. ocean policy by President Ronald Reagan states that UNCLOS contains provisions with respect to traditional uses of the oceans which generally confirm existing maritime law and practice and fairly balance the interests of all states. Today I am announcing three decisions to promote and protect the oceans interests of the United States in a manner consistent with those fair and balanced results in the Convention and international law. First, the United States is prepared to accept and act in accordance with the balance of interests relating to traditional uses of the oceans—such as navigation and overflight. In this respect, the United States will recognize the rights of other states in the waters off their coasts, as reflected in the Convention, so long as the rights and freedoms of the United States and others under international law are recognized by such coastal states. Second, the United States will exercise and assert its navigation and overflight rights and freedoms on a worldwide basis in a manner that is consistent with the balance of interests reflected in the convention. The United States will not, however, acquiesce in unilateral acts of other states designed to restrict the rights and freedoms of the international community in navigation and overflight and other related high seas uses. Third, I am proclaiming today an Exclusive Economic Zone in which the United States will exercise sovereign rights in living and nonliving resources within 200 nautical miles of its coast. This will provide United States jurisdiction for mineral resources out to 200 nautical miles that are not on the continental shelf.114 1972 Convention on Preventing Collisions at Sea (COLREGs) China and the United States, as well as more than 150 other countries (including all those bordering on the South East and South China Seas, but not Taiwan),115 are parties to an October 1972 multilateral convention on international regulations for preventing collisions at sea, commonly known as the collision regulations (COLREGs) or the “rules of the road.”116 Although 114 United States Ocean Policy, Statement by the President, March 10, 1983, accessed April 15, 2015, at http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/143224.pdf. The text is also available at http://www.reagan.utexas.edu/archives/speeches/1983/31083c.htm. 115 Source: International Maritime Organization, Status of Multilateral Conventions and Instruments in Respect of Which the International Maritime Organization or its Secretary-General Performs Depositary or Other Functions, As at 28 February 2014, pp. 86-89. The Philippines acceded to the convention on June 10, 2013. 116 28 UST 3459; TIAS 8587. The treaty was done at London October 20, 1972, and entered into force July 15, 1977. The United States is an original signatory to the convention and acceded the convention entered into force for the United States on July 15, 1977. China acceded to the treaty on January 7, 1980. A summary of the agreement is U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 50 commonly referred to as a set of rules or regulations, this multilateral convention is a binding treaty. The convention applies “to all vessels upon the high seas and in all waters connected therewith navigable by seagoing vessels.”117 It thus applies to military vessels, paramilitary and law enforcement (i.e., coast guard) vessels, maritime militia vessels, and fishing boats, among other vessels. In a February 18, 2014, letter to Senator Marco Rubio concerning the December 5, 2013, incident involving the Cowpens, the State Department stated the following: In order to minimize the potential for an accident or incident at sea, it is important that the United States and China share a common understanding of the rules for operational air or maritime interactions. From the U.S. perspective, an existing body of international rules and guidelines—including the 1972 International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea (COLREGs)—are sufficient to ensure the safety of navigation between U.S. forces and the force of other countries, including China. We will continue to make clear to the Chinese that these existing rules, including the COLREGs, should form the basis for our common understanding of air and maritime behavior, and we will encourage China to incorporate these rules into its incident-management tools. Likewise, we will continue to urge China to agree to adopt bilateral crisis management tools with Japan and to rapidly conclude negotiations with ASEAN118 on a robust and meaningful Code of Conduct in the South China in order to avoid incidents and to manage them when they arise. We will continue to stress the importance of these issues in our regular interactions with Chinese officials.119 In the 2014 edition of its annual report on military and security developments involving China, the DOD states the following: On December 5, 2013, a PLA Navy vessel and a U.S. Navy vessel operating in the South China Sea came into close proximity. At the time of the incident, USS COWPENS (CG 63) was operating approximately 32 nautical miles southeast of Hainan Island. In that location, the U.S. Navy vessel was conducting lawful military activities beyond the territorial sea of any coastal State, consistent with customary international law as reflected in the Law of the Sea Convention. Two PLA Navy vessels approached USS COWPENS. During this interaction, one of the PLA Navy vessels altered course and crossed directly in front of the bow of USS COWPENS. This maneuver by the PLA Navy vessel forced USS COWPENS to come to full stop to avoid collision, while the PLA Navy vessel passed less than 100 yards ahead. The PLA Navy vessel’s action was inconsistent with internationally recognized rules concerning professional maritime behavior (i.e., the Convention of International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea), to which China is a party.120 available at http://www.imo.org/About/Conventions/ListOfConventions/Pages/COLREG.aspx. The text of the convention is available at https://treaties.un.org/doc/Publication/UNTS/Volume%201050/volume-1050-I-15824-English.pdf. 117 Rule 1(a) of the convention. 118 ASEAN is the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. ASEAN’s member states are Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam. 119 Letter dated February 18, 2014, from Julia Frifield, Assistant Secretary, Legislative Affairs, Department of State, to The Honorable Marco Rubio, United States Senate. Used here with the permission of the office of Senator Rubio. The letter begins: “Thank you for your letter of January 31 regarding the December 5, 2013, incident involving a Chinese naval vessel and the USS Cowpens.” The text of Senator Rubio’s January 31, 2014, letter was accessed March 13, 2014, at http://www.rubio.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/2014/1/rubio-calls-on-administration-to-address-provocative-chinese-behavior. 120 Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress [on] Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2014, p. 4. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 51 2014 Code for Unplanned Encounters at Sea (CUES) On April 22, 2014, representatives of 21 Pacific-region navies (including China, Japan, and the United States), meeting in Qingdao, China, at the 14th Western Pacific Naval Symposium (WPNS),121 unanimously agreed to a Code for Unplanned Encounters at Sea (CUES). CUES, a nonbinding agreement, establishes a standardized protocol of safety procedures, basic communications, and basic maneuvering instructions for naval ships and aircraft during unplanned encounters at sea, with the aim of reducing the risk of incidents arising from such encounters.122 The CUES agreement in effect supplements the 1972 COLREGs Convention (see previous section); it does not cancel or lessen commitments that countries have as parties to the COLREGS Convention. Two observers stated that “the [CUES] resolution is non-binding; only regulates communication in ‘unplanned encounters,’ not behavior; fails to address incidents in territorial waters; and does not apply to fishing and maritime constabulary vessels [i.e., coast guard ships and other maritime law enforcement ships], which are responsible for the majority of Chinese harassment operations.”123 DOD stated in 2015 that Going forward, the Department is also exploring options to expand the use of CUES to include regional law enforcement vessels and Coast Guards. Given the growing use of maritime law enforcement vessels to enforce disputed maritime claims, expansion of CUES to MLE [maritime law enforcement] vessels would be an important step in reducing the risk of unintentional conflict.124 U.S. Navy officials have stated that the CUES agreement is generally working well, and that the United States (as noted in the passage above) is interested in expanding the agreement to cover coast guard ships.125 Officials from Singapore and Malaysia reportedly have expressed support 121 For more on the WPNS, see Singapore Ministry of Defense, “Fact Sheet: Background of the Western Pacific Naval Symposium, MCMEX, DIVEX and NMS,” updated March 25, 2011, accessed October 1, 2012, at http://www.mindef.gov.sg/imindef/news_and_events/nr/2011/mar/25mar11_nr/25mar11_fs.html. 122 See, for example, “Navy Leaders Agree to CUES at 14th WPNS,” Navy News Services, April 23, 2014; Austin Ramzy and Chris Buckley, “Pacific Rim Deal Could Reduce Chance of Unintended Conflict in Contested Seas,” New York Times, April 23, 2014; Megha Rajagopalan, “Pacific Accord on Maritime Code Could Help Prevent Conflicts,” Reuters.com, April 22, 2014. For additional background information on CUES, see Mark E. Redden and Phillip C. Saunders, Managing Sino-U.S. Air and Naval Interactions: Cold War Lessons and New Avenues of Approach, Washington, Center for the Study of Chinese Military Affairs, Institute for National Strategic Studies, National Defense University, September 2012, pp. 8-9. The text of the previous 2003 CUES Review Supplement was accessed October 1, 2012, at http://navy.mil.my/wpns2012/images/stories/dokumen/WPNS%202012%20PRESENTATION%20FOLDER/ACTION%20ITEMS%20WPNS%20WORKSHOP%202012/CUES.PDF. 123 Jeff M. Smith and Joshua Eisenman, “China and America Clash on the High Seas: The EEZ Challenge,” The National Interest, May 22, 2014. 124 Department of Defense, Asia-Pacific Maritime Security Strategy, undated but released August 2015, p. 31. 125 See, for example, Rosalin Amthieson, “Chinese Navy in South China Sea Draws U.S. Admiral’s Praise,” Bloomberg, April 26, 2016; Michael Fabey, “Sino-U.S. Naval Drills Pay Off, Greenert Says,” Aerospace Daily & Defense Report, August 20, 2015; David Tweed, “U.S. Seeks to Expand China Navy Code to Coast Guard, Swift Says,” Bloomberg Business, August 25, 2015; Christopher P. Cavas, “New CNO Richardson Invited To Visit China,” Defense News, August 25, 2015; Nina P. Calleja, “Positive Relations With China A Must—US Admiral,” Philippine Daily Inquirer, August 26, 2015; Shannon Tiezzi, “US Admiral: China ‘Very Interested’ in RIMPAC 2016,” The Diplomat, August 27, 2015; Andrea Shalal, “U.S., Chinese Officers Encouraged by Use of Rules for Ship Meetings,” Reuters, January 20, 2016; Prashanth Parameswaran, “US Wants Expanded Naval Protocol Amid China’s South China Sea Assertiveness,” The Diplomat, February 18, 2016. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 52 for the idea.126 An Obama Administration fact sheet about Chinese President Xi Jinping’s state visit to the United States on September 24-25, 2015, stated the following: The U.S. Coast Guard and the China Coast Guard have committed to pursue an arrangement whose intended purpose is equivalent to the Rules of Behavior Confidence Building Measure annex on surface-to-surface encounters in the November 2014 Memorandum of Understanding between the United States Department of Defense and the People’s Republic of China Ministry of National Defense.127 A November 3, 2018, press report published following an incident in the SCS between a U.S. Navy destroyer and a Chinese destroyer stated the following: The U.S. Navy’s chief of naval operations has called on China to return to a previously agreed-upon code of conduct for at-sea encounters between the ships of their respective navies, stressing the need to avoid miscalculations. During a Nov. 1 teleconference with reporters based in the Asia-Pacific region, Adm. John Richardson said he wants the People’s Liberation Army Navy to “return to a consistent adherence to the agreed-to code that would again minimize the chance for a miscalculation that could possibly lead to a local incident and potential escalation.” The CNO cited a case in early October when the U.S. Navy’s guided-missile destroyer Decatur reported that a Chinese Type 052C destroyer came within 45 yards of the Decatur as it conducted a freedom-of-navigation operation in the South China Sea. However, he added that the “vast majority” of encounters with Chinese warships in the South China Sea “are conducted in accordance with the Code of Unplanned Encounters at Sea and done in a safe and professional manner.” The code is an agreement reached by 21 Pacific nations in 2014 to reduce the chance of an incident at sea between the agreement’s signatories.128 2014 U.S.-China MOU on Air and Maritime Encounters In November 2014, the U.S. DOD and China’s Ministry of National Defense signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) regarding rules of behavior for safety of air and maritime encounters.129 The MOU makes reference to UNCLOS, the 1972 COLREGs convention, the Conventional on International Civil Aviation (commonly known as the Chicago Convention), the Agreement on Establishing a Consultation Mechanism to Strengthen Military Maritime Safety (MMCA), and CUES.130 The MOU as signed in November 2014 included an annex on rules of 126 See, for example, Prashanth Parameswaran, “Malaysia Wants Expanded Naval Protocol Amid South China Sea Disputes,” The Diplomat, December 4, 2015; Prashanth Parameswaran, “What Did the 3rd ASEAN Defense Minister’s Meeting Plus Achieve?” The Diplomat, November 5, 2015. See also Lee YingHui, “ASEAN Should Choose CUES for the South China Sea,” East Asia Forum, April 6, 2016. See also Hoang Thi Ha, “Making the Cues Code Work in the South China Sea,” Today, September 8, 2016. 127 “FACT SHEET: President Xi Jinping’s State Visit to the United States,” September 25, 2015, accessed November 24, 2015, at https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/09/25/fact-sheet-president-xi-jinpings-state-visit-united-states. 128 Mike Yeo, “Top US Navy Officer Tells China to Behave at Sea,” Defense News, November 3, 2018. 129 Memorandum of Understanding Between The Department of Defense of the United States of America and the Ministry of National Defense of the People’s Republic of China Regarding the Rules of Behavior for Safety of Air and Maritime Encounters, November 12, 2014. 130 DOD states that In 2014, then-Secretary Hagel and his Chinese counterpart signed a historic Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on Rules of Behavior for Safety of Air and Maritime Encounters. The MOU established a common understanding of operational procedures for when air and maritime vessels U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 53 behavior for safety of surface-to-surface encounters. An additional annex on rules of behavior for safety of air-to-air encounters was signed on September 15 and 18, 2015.131 An October 20, 2018, press report states the following: Eighteen nations including the U.S. and China agreed in principle Saturday [October 20] to sign up to guidelines governing potentially dangerous encounters by military aircraft, a step toward stabilizing flashpoints but one that leaves enough wiggle room to ignore the new standards when a country wants. The guidelines essentially broaden a similar agreement reached by the U.S. and China three years ago and are an attempt to mitigate against incidents and collisions in some of the world’s most tense areas…. The in-principle agreement, which will be put forward for formal adoption by the group of 18 nations next year, took place at an annual meeting of defense ministers under the aegis of the 10-country Association of Southeast Asian Nations, hosted by Singapore. Asean nations formally adopted the new guidelines themselves Friday. “The guidelines are very useful in setting norms,” Singapore’s defense minister Ng Eng Hen told reporters after the meeting. “All the 18 countries agreed strong in-principle support for the guidelines.”… The aerial-encounters framework agreed to Saturday includes language that prohibits fast or aggressive approaches in the air and lays out guidelines on clear communications including suggestions to “refrain from the use of uncivil language or unfriendly physical gestures.” Signatories to the agreement, which is voluntary and not legally binding, would agree to avoid unprofessional encounters and reckless maneuvers…. The guidelines fall short on enforcement and geographic specifics, but they are “better than nothing at all,” said Evan Laksmana, senior researcher with the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Jakarta. “Confidence-building surrounding military crises or encounters can hardly move forward without some broadly agreed-upon rules of the game,” he said.132 meet at sea, drawing from and reinforcing existing international law and standards and managing risk by reducing the possibility of misunderstanding and misperception between the militaries of the United States and China. To date, this MOU includes an annex for ship-to-ship encounters. To augment this MOU, the Department of Defense has prioritized developing an annex on air-to-air encounters by the end of 2015. Upon the conclusion of this final annex, bilateral consultations under the Rules of Behavior MOU will be facilitated under the existing MMCA forum. (Department of Defense, Asia-Pacific Maritime Security Strategy, undated but released August 2015, p. 30.) For additional discussion of the MOU, see Peter A. Dutton, “MOUs: The Secret Sauce to Avoiding a U.S.-China Disaster?” National Interest, January 30, 2015; Mira Rapp-Hooper and Bonnie Glaser, “In Confidence: Will We Know If US-China CBMs Are Working?” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative (Center for Strategic and International Studies), February 4, 2015; Mira Rapp-Hooper, “What’s in a Confidence Building Measure?” Lawfare, February 8, 2015; Peter Dutton and Andrew Erickson, “When Eagle Meets Dragon: Managing Risk in Maritime East Asia,” Real Clear Defense, March 25, 2015. 131 For a critical commentary on the annex for air-to-air encounters, see James Kraska and Raul “Pete” Pedrozo, “The US-China Arrangement for Air-to-Air Encounters Weakens International Law,” Lawfare, March 9, 2016. 132 Jake Maxwell Watts, “Defense Chiefs Seek Friendlier Skies Over Asia’s Military Flashpoints,” Wall Street Journal, October 20, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 54 Negotiations on SCS Code of Conduct (COC) In 2002, China and the 10 member states of ASEAN signed a nonbinding Declaration on the Conduct (DOC) of Parties in the South China Sea in which the parties, among other things, ... reaffirm their respect for and commitment to the freedom of navigation in and overflight above the South China Sea as provided for by the universally recognized principles of international law, including the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.... ... undertake to resolve their territorial and jurisdictional disputes by peaceful means, without resorting to the threat or use of force, through friendly consultations and negotiations by sovereign states directly concerned, in accordance with universally recognized principles of international law, including the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.... ... undertake to exercise self-restraint in the conduct of activities that would complicate or escalate disputes and affect peace and stability including, among others, refraining from action of inhabiting on the presently uninhabited islands, reefs, shoals, cays, and other features and to handle their differences in a constructive manner.... ...reaffirm that the adoption of a [follow-on] code of conduct in the South China Sea would further promote peace and stability in the region and agree to work, on the basis of consensus, towards the eventual attainment of this objective....133 In July 2011, China and ASEAN adopted a preliminary set of principles for implementing the DOC. U.S. officials since 2010 have encouraged ASEAN and China to develop the follow-on binding Code of Conduct (COC) mentioned in the final quoted paragraph above. China and ASEAN have conducted negotiations on the follow-on COC, but China has not yet agreed with the ASEAN member states on a final text. On March 8, 2017, China announced that the first draft of a framework for the COC had been completed, and that “China and ASEAN countries feel satisfied with this.”134 On May 18 and 19, 2017, it was reported that the China and the ASEAN countries had agreed on the framework.135 A May 18, 2017, press report stated that [China’s Vice-Foreign Minister] Liu Zhemin “called on others to stay out [of the negotiations], apparently a coded message to the United States. ‘We hope that our consultations on the code are not subject to any outside interference,’ Liu said.”136 An August 3, 2017, press report stated that “the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) has omitted references to China’s most controversial activities in its joint communique, a draft reviewed by Reuters shows. In addition, a leaked blueprint for establishing an ASEAN- 133 Text as taken from https://cil.nus.edu.sg/rp/pdf/2002%20Declaration%20on%20the%20Conduct%20of%20Parties%20in%20the%20South%20China%20Sea-pdf.pdf. 134 See, Ben Blanchard, “China Says First Draft of South China Sea Code of Conduct Ready,” Reuters, March 8, 2017; Hong Thao Nguyen, “A Code of Conduct for the South China Sea: Effective Tool or Temporary Solution?” Maritime Awareness Project, March 28, 2017. The second of these two sources identifies the reported draft as being that of a framework for the COC rather than a full draft text of the COC. 135 Ben Blanchard, “China, ASEAN Agree on Framework for South China Sea Code of Conduct,” Reuters, May 18, 2017; Agence France-Presse, “China, ASEAN Agree on Draft Framework for South China Sea Code,” Yahoo News, May 19, 2017; Li Xiaokun and Mo Jingxi, “Guideline for Conduct Pact in South China Sea OK’d,” People’s Daily Online (from China Daily), May 19, 2017. 136 Ben Blanchard, “China, ASEAN Agree on Framework for South China Sea Code of Conduct,” Reuters, May 18, 2017. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 55 China code of maritime conduct does not call for it to be legally binding, or seek adherence to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).”137 An August 6, 2017, press report stated that “Southeast Asian nations agreed with China on Sunday [August 6] to endorse a framework for a maritime code of conduct that would govern behavior in disputed waters of the South China Sea, a small step forward in a negotiation that has lasted well over a decade…. The unsticking of the framework after years of obstruction is widely seen as a concession by China, which has opposed any legally binding code on maritime engagement, stepped up naval patrols and built artificial islands to enforce its claims, equipping them with military weapons.”138 An August 8, 2017, blog post about the framework states the following: In Manila on 6 August 2017, the foreign ministers of ASEAN and China endorsed the framework for the Code of Conduct for the South China Sea (COC). While the framework is a step forward in the conflict management process for the South China Sea, it is short on details and contains many of the same principles and provisions contained in the 2002 ASEAN-China Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC) which has yet to be even partially implemented. The text includes a new reference to the prevention and management of incidents, as well as a seemingly stronger commitment to maritime security and freedom of navigation. However, the phrase “legally binding” is absent, as are the geographical scope of the agreement and enforcement and arbitration mechanisms. The framework will form the basis for further negotiations on the COC. Those discussions are likely to be lengthy and frustrating for those ASEAN members who had hoped to see a legally binding, comprehensive and effective COC.139 Some observers have argued that China has been dragging out the negotiations on the COC for years as part of a “talk and take strategy,” meaning a strategy in which China engages in (or draws out) negotiations while taking actions to gain control of contested areas.140 An October 22, 2018, press report stated the following: One of the Chinese provisions in the [draft South China Sea code of conduct] states, “The Parties shall not hold joint military exercises with countries from outside the region, unless the parties concerned are notified beforehand and express no objection.” China also proposed cooperation on the marine economy “shall not be conducted in cooperation with companies from countries outside the region.” A State Department spokesperson told VOA the United States is concerned by reports China has been pressing members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations “in the closed-door talks, to accept restrictions on their ability to conduct exercises with security 137 Manuel Mogato, “China Set for Easy Ride from ASEAN on Disputed South China Sea,” Reuters, August 3, 2017. 138 Jake Maxwell Watts, “China, Asean to Test Waters on South China Sea,” Wall Street Journal, August 6, 2017. See also “ASEAN Foreign Ministers Endorse Framework of COC in South China Sea,” Xinhua, August 6, 2017; Cao Siqi, “China, ASEAN Approve Sea Code,” Global Times, August 6, 2017. 139 Ian Storey, “Assessing the ASEAN-China Framework for the Code of Conduct for the South China Sea,” ISEAS—Yusof Ishak Institute, August 8, 2017. 140 Seem for example, “China and ASEAN Declare Progress in the South China Sea,” The Economist, May 25, 2017; Lee YingHui, “A South China Sea Code of Conduct: Is Real Progress Possible?” The Diplomat, November 18, 2017; Huong Le Thu, “The Dangerous Quest for a Code of Conduct in the South China Sea,” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative (Center for Strategic and International Studies), July 13, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 56 partners, and to agree not to conduct oil and gas exploration in their claimed waters with energy firms based in countries which are not part of the ongoing negotiations.” “These proposals, if accepted, would limit the ability of ASEAN nations to conduct sovereign, independent foreign and economic policies and would directly harm the interests of the broader international community,” added the State Department spokesperson…. “In other words, China would like a veto over all the military exercises held by ASEAN countries with other nations. I think this really provides some evidence that China indeed is trying to limit American influence in the region, one might go so far as to say to push American military presence out of the region eventually, but certainly in the area of the South China Sea,” said Bonnie Glaser, director of the China Power Project at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington.141 A September 6, 2018, blog post stated that “any system to effectively manage the South China Sea disputes would require three things, none of which are achieved yet in the draft text. First, an effective COC would need to be geographically defined…. Second, an effective COC would need a dispute settlement mechanism…. Third, any effective regime to manage the South China Sea disputes would need detailed provisions on fisheries management and oil and gas development.”142 An October 29, 2018, press report states that “The Philippines on Monday [October 29] said a set of rules intended to prevent conflict in the South China Sea need not legally compel countries to follow it—an issue of importance for the Chinese government.”143 A November 14, 2018, press report stated the following: A rulebook to settle disputes in the hotly contested South China Sea should be finished in three years, Chinese Premier Li Keqiang said on Tuesday [November 13], insisting his nation does not seek “hegemony or expansion.” Li’s comments appeared to be the first clear timeframe for finishing the code of conduct. Talks have dragged on for years, with China accused of delaying progress as it prefers to deal with less powerful countries on a one-to-one basis.144 141 Nike Ching, “South China Sea Code of Conduct Gains Momentum as China Moves to Complete Militarization,” VOA, October 22, 2018. 142 Gregory B Poling, “South China Sea Code of Conduct Still a Speck on the Horizon,” East Asia Forum, September 6, 2018. 143 Cliff Venzon, “Philippines Hints at Compromise on South China Sea Dispute Pact,” Nikkei Asian Review, October 29, 2018. 144 Jerome Taylor, “Beijing Wants South China Sea Code Finished in Three Years,” Philippine Star, November 14, 2018. See also Lee Chyen Yee, “Chinese Premier Li Says Talks on South China Sea Code Should End in Three Years,” Reuters, November 12, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 57 Appendix D. July 2016 Tribunal Award in SCS Arbitration Case Involving Philippines and China This appendix provides background information on the July 2016 tribunal award in the SCS arbitration case involving the Philippines and China. Overview In 2013, the Philippines sought arbitration under UNCLOS over the role of historic rights and the source of maritime entitlements in the South China Sea, the status of certain maritime features and the maritime entitlements they are capable of generating, and the lawfulness of certain actions by China that were alleged by the Philippines to violate UNCLOS. A tribunal was constituted under UNCLOS to hear the case. China stated repeatedly that it would not accept or participate in the arbitration and that, in its view, the tribunal lacked jurisdiction in this matter. China’s nonparticipation did not prevent the case from moving forward, and the tribunal decided that it had jurisdiction over various matters covered under the case. On July 12, 2016, the tribunal issued its award (i.e., ruling) in the case. The award was strongly in favor of the Philippines—more so than even some observers had anticipated. The tribunal ruled, among other things, that China’s nine-dash line claim had no legal basis; that none of the land features in the Spratlys is entitled to any more than a 12-nm territorial sea; that three of the Spratlys features that China occupies generate no entitlement to maritime zones; and that China violated the Philippines’ sovereign rights by interfering with Philippine vessels and by damaging the maritime environment and engaging in reclamation work on a feature in the Philippines’ EEZ. Under UNCLOS, the award is binding on both the Philippines and China (China’s nonparticipation in the arbitration does not change this). There is, however, no mechanism for enforcing the tribunal’s award. The United States has urged China and the Philippines to abide by the award. China, however, has declared the ruling null and void.145 Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte, who took office just before the tribunal’s ruling, has not sought to enforce it. The tribunal’s press release summarizing its award states the following in part: The Award is final and binding, as set out in Article 296 of the Convention [i.e., UNCLOS] and Article 11 of Annex VII [of UNCLOS]. Historic Rights and the ‘Nine-Dash Line’: ... On the merits, the Tribunal concluded that the Convention comprehensively allocates rights to maritime areas and that protections for pre-existing rights to resources were considered, but not adopted in the Convention. Accordingly, the Tribunal concluded that, to the extent China had historic rights to resources in the waters of the South China Sea, such rights were extinguished to the extent they were incompatible with the exclusive economic zones provided for in the Convention. The Tribunal also noted that, although Chinese navigators and fishermen, as well as those of other States, had historically made use of the islands in the South China Sea, there was no evidence that China had historically exercised exclusive control over the waters or their 145 For discussions of China’s compliance with the award, see Julian Ku and Christopher Mirasola, “Analysis: Chinese South China Sea Operations Ambiguous After Ruling,” USNI News, October 17, 2016; Julian Ku and Chris Mirasola, “Tracking China’s Compliance with the South China Sea Arbitral Award,” Lawfare, October 3, 2016; Tuan N. Pham, “The South China Sea Ruling: 1 Month Later,” The Diplomat, August 12, 2016. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 58 resources. The Tribunal concluded that there was no legal basis for China to claim historic rights to resources within the sea areas falling within the ‘nine-dash line’. Status of Features: ... Features that are above water at high tide generate an entitlement to at least a 12 nautical mile territorial sea, whereas features that are submerged at high tide do not. The Tribunal noted that the reefs have been heavily modified by land reclamation and construction, recalled that the Convention classifies features on their natural condition, and relied on historical materials in evaluating the features. The Tribunal then considered whether any of the features claimed by China could generate maritime zones beyond 12 nautical miles. Under the Convention, islands generate an exclusive economic zone of 200 nautical miles and a continental shelf, but “[r]ocks which cannot sustain human habitation or economic life of their own shall have no exclusive economic zone or continental shelf.” ... the Tribunal concluded that none of the Spratly Islands is capable of generating extended maritime zones. The Tribunal also held that the Spratly Islands cannot generate maritime zones collectively as a unit. Having found that none of the features claimed by China was capable of generating an exclusive economic zone, the Tribunal found that it could—without delimiting a boundary—declare that certain sea areas are within the exclusive economic zone of the Philippines, because those areas are not overlapped by any possible entitlement of China. Lawfulness of Chinese Actions:... Having found that certain areas are within the exclusive economic zone of the Philippines, the Tribunal found that China had violated the Philippines’ sovereign rights in its exclusive economic zone by (a) interfering with Philippine fishing and petroleum exploration, (b) constructing artificial islands and (c) failing to prevent Chinese fishermen from fishing in the zone. The Tribunal also held that fishermen from the Philippines (like those from China) had traditional fishing rights at Scarborough Shoal and that China had interfered with these rights in restricting access. The Tribunal further held that Chinese law enforcement vessels had unlawfully created a serious risk of collision when they physically obstructed Philippine vessels. Harm to Marine Environment: The Tribunal considered the effect on the marine environment of China’s recent large-scale land reclamation and construction of artificial islands at seven features in the Spratly Islands and found that China had caused severe harm to the coral reef environment and violated its obligation to preserve and protect fragile ecosystems and the habitat of depleted, threatened, or endangered species. The Tribunal also found that Chinese authorities were aware that Chinese fishermen have harvested endangered sea turtles, coral, and giant clams on a substantial scale in the South China Sea (using methods that inflict severe damage on the coral reef environment) and had not fulfilled their obligations to stop such activities. Aggravation of Dispute: Finally, the Tribunal considered whether China’s actions since the commencement of the arbitration had aggravated the dispute between the Parties. The Tribunal found that it lacked jurisdiction to consider the implications of a stand-off between Philippine marines and Chinese naval and law enforcement vessels at Second Thomas Shoal, holding that this dispute involved military activities and was therefore excluded from compulsory settlement. The Tribunal found, however, that China’s recent large-scale land reclamation and construction of artificial islands was incompatible with the obligations on a State during dispute resolution proceedings, insofar as China has inflicted irreparable harm to the marine environment, built a large artificial island in the Philippines’ exclusive economic zone, and destroyed evidence of the natural condition of features in the South China Sea that formed part of the Parties’ dispute.146 146 Permanent Court of Arbitration press release, “The South China Sea Arbitration (The Republic of the Philippines v. The People’s Republic of China),” July 12, 2016, pp. 1-2. The full text of the award is: PCA Case Nº 2013-19, In the Matter of the South China Sea Arbitration before An Arbitral Tribunal Constituted Under Annex VII to the 1982 U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 59 Assessments of Impact of Arbitral Award One Year Later In July 2017, a year after the arbitral panel’s award, some observers assessed the impact to date of the award. For example, one observer stated the following: One year ago, China suffered a massive legal defeat when an international tribunal based in The Hague ruled that the vast majority of Beijing’s extensive claims to maritime rights and resources in the South China Sea were not compatible with international law. Beijing was furious. At an official briefing immediately after the ruling, Vice Foreign Minister Liu Zhenmin twice called it “nothing more than a piece of waste paper,” and one that “will not be enforced by anyone.” And yet, one year on, China is, in many ways, abiding by it.... China is not fully complying with the ruling—far from it. On May 1, China imposed a three-and-a-half-month ban on fishing across the northern part of the South China Sea, as it has done each year since 1995. While the ban may help conserve fish stocks, its unilateral imposition in wide areas of the sea violates the ruling. Further south, China’s occupation of Mischief Reef, a feature that is submerged at high tide and the tribunal ruled was part of the Philippines’ continental shelf, endures. Having built a vast naval base and runway here, China looks like it will remain in violation of that part of the ruling for the foreseeable future. But there is evidence that the Chinese authorities, despite their rhetoric, have already changed their behavior. In October 2016, three months after the ruling, Beijing allowed Philippine and Vietnamese boats to resume fishing at Scarborough Shoal, west of the Philippines. A China Coast Guard ship still blocks the entrance to the lagoon, but boats can still fish the rich waters around it. The situation is not perfect but neither is China flaunting its defiance.... Much more significantly, China has avoided drilling for oil and gas on the wrong side of the invisible lines prescribed by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).... ... the ruling means China has no claim to the fish, oil or gas more than 12 nautical miles from any of the Spratlys or Scarborough Shoal. The Chinese authorities appear not to accept this.... There are clear signs from both China’s words and deeds that Beijing has quietly modified its overall legal position in the South China Sea. Australian researcher Andrew Chubb noted a significant article in the Chinese press in July last year outlining the new view.... ... China’s new position seems to represent a major step towards compliance with UNCLOS and, therefore, the ruling. Most significantly, it removes the grounds for Chinese objections to other countries fishing and drilling in wide areas of the South China Sea.... Overall, the picture is of a China attempting to bring its vision of the rightful regional order (as the legitimate owner of every rock and reef inside the U-shaped line) within commonly understood international rules. Far from being “waste paper,” China is taking the tribunal ruling very seriously. It is still some way from total compliance but it is clearly not deliberately flouting the ruling.147 United Nations Convention on the law of the Sea between The Republic of the Philippines and The People’s Republic of China, Award, Arbitral Tribunal: Judge Thomas A. Mensah (Presiding Arbitrator), Judge Jean-Pierre Cot, Judge Stanislaw Pawlak, Professor Alfred H.A. Soons, Judge Rüdiger Wolfrum, Registry: Permanent Court of Arbitration, 12 July 2016, 479 pp. Further information and documents on the case can be found at http://www.pcacases.com/web/view/7. 147 Bill Hayton, “Beijing shifts strategy in South China Sea,” Nikkei Asian Review, July 12, 2017. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 60 Another observer stated the following: A year ago today, an arbitral tribunal formed pursuant to the United Nations Convention for the Law of the Sea issued a blockbuster award finding much of China’s conduct in the South China Sea in violation of international law. As I detailed that day on this blog and elsewhere, the Philippines won about as big a legal victory as it could have expected. But as many of us also warned that day, a legal victory is not the same as an actual victory. In fact, over the past year China has succeeded in transforming its legal defeat into a policy victory by maintaining its aggressive South China Sea policies while escaping sanction for its non-compliance. While the election of a new pro-China Philippines government is a key factor, much of the blame for China’s victory must also be placed on the Obama Administration.... International law seldom enforces itself, and even the reputational costs of violating international law do not arise unless other states impose those costs on the law-breaker. Both the Philippines and the U.S. had policy options that would have raised the costs of China’s non-compliance with the award. But neither country’s government chose to press China on the arbitral award.... Looking back after one year, we cannot say (yet) that U.S. policy in the South China Sea is a failure. But we can say that the U.S. under President Obama missed a huge opportunity to change the dynamics in the region in its favor, and it is hard to know whether or when another such opportunity will arise in the future.148 Reported Chinese Characterization of Arbitral Award as “Waste Paper” When the arbitral panel’s award was announced, China stated that “China does not accept or recognize it,” and that the award “is invalid and has no binding force.”149 The first of the two passages quoted above states that “at an official briefing immediately after the ruling, Vice Foreign Minister Liu Zhenmin twice called it ‘nothing more than a piece of waste paper,’ and one that ‘will not be enforced by anyone.’” A November 22, 2017, press report states the following: An eight-page essay pumped through social media and Chinese state newspapers in recent days extolled the virtues of president Xi Jinping. Among his achievements, in the Chinese language version, was that he had turned the South China Sea Arbitration at The Hague—which found against China—into “waste paper”. It was an achievement that state news agency Xinhua’s lengthy hymn, entitled “Xi and His Era”, did not include in the English version for foreign consumption.150 148 Julian Ku, “Assessing the South China Sea Arbitral Award after One Year: Why China Won and the U.S. is Losing,” Lawfare, July 12, 2017. 149 See, for example, Jane Perlez, “Tribunal Rejects Beijing’s Claims in South China Sea,” New York Times, July 12, 2016; Thomas E. Kellogg, “The South China Sea Ruling: China's International Law Dilemma,” The Diplomat, July 14, 2017. 150 Kirsty Needham, “'Xi and his Era': China adopts a triumphant tone as US world leadership falters,” Sydney Morning Herald,” November 22, 2017. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 61 Assessments and Events Two Years Later Another observer writes in a May 10, 2018, commentary piece that Two years after an international tribunal rejected expansive Chinese claims to the South China Sea, Beijing is consolidating control over the area and its resources. While the U.S. defends the right to freedom of navigation, it has failed to support the rights of neighboring countries under the tribunal’s ruling. As a result, Southeast Asian countries are bowing to Beijing’s demands…. While Beijing’s dramatic military buildup in the South China Sea has received much attention, its attempts at “lawfare” are largely overlooked. In May, the Chinese Society of International Law published a “critical study” on the South China Sea arbitration case. It rehashed old arguments but also developed a newer one, namely that China is entitled to claim maritime zones based on groups of features rather than from individual features. Even if China is not entitled to historic rights within the area it claims, this argument goes, it is entitled to resources in a wide expanse of sea on the basis of an exclusive economic zone generated from outlying archipelagoes. But the Convention on the Law of the Sea makes clear that only archipelagic states such as the Philippines and Indonesia may draw straight archipelagic baselines from which maritime zones may be claimed. The tribunal also explicitly found that there was “no evidence” that any deviations from this rule have amounted to the formation of a new rule of customary international law. China’s arguments are unlikely to sway lawyers, but that is not their intended audience. Rather Beijing is offering a legal fig leaf to political and business elites in Southeast Asia who are already predisposed to accept Beijing’s claims in the South China Sea. They fear China’s threat of coercive economic measures and eye promises of development through offerings such as the Belt and Road Initiative. Why did Washington go quiet on the 2016 tribunal decision? One reason is Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte’s turn toward China and offer to set aside the ruling. The U.S. is also worried about the decision’s implications for its own claims to exclusive economic zones from small, uninhabited land features in the Pacific. The Trump administration’s failure to press Beijing to abide by the tribunal’s ruling is a serious mistake. It undermines international law and upsets the balance of power in the region. Countries have taken note that the tide in the South China Sea is in China’s favor, and they are making their strategic calculations accordingly. This hurts U.S. interests in the region.151 A July 12, 2018, press report stated the following: The Philippines is celebrating today the second anniversary of its landmark arbitration award against China’s territorial claims in the South China Sea handed down by an arbitral tribunal in The Hague…. Until now, the Philippines remains sharply divided on how to leverage its arbitration award. Filipino President Rodrigo Duterte has repeatedly downplayed the relevance of the ruling by questioning its enforceability amid China’s vociferous opposition. Soon after taking office in mid-2016, Duterte declared that he would “set aside” the arbitration award in order to pursue a “soft landing” in bilateral relations with China. In exchange, he has hoped for large-scale Chinese investments as well as resource-sharing in the South China Sea…. 151 Lynn Kuok, “China Is Winning in the South China Sea,” Wall Street Journal, July 17, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 62 Other major leaders in the Philippines, however, have taken a tougher stance and continue to try to leverage the award to resist China’s expanding footprint in the area. The Stratbase-Albert Del Rosario Institute, an influential think tank co-founded by former Philippine Secretary of Foreign Affairs Albert del Rosario, hosted today a high-level forum on the topic at the prestigious Manila Polo Club. Del Rosario oversaw the arbitration proceedings against China under Duterte’s predecessor, Benigno Aquino. He opened the event attended by dignitaries from major Western and Asian countries with a strident speech which accused China of trying to “dominate the South China Sea through force and coercion.” He defended the arbitration award as an “overwhelming victory” to resist “China’s unlawful expansion agenda.” The ex-top diplomat also accused the Duterte administration of acquiescence to China by acting as an “abettor” and “willing victim” by soft-pedaling the Philippines’ claims in the South China Sea and refusing to raise the arbitration award in multilateral fora. The keynote speaker of the event was Vice President Leni Robredo, who has recently emerged as the de facto leader of the opposition against Duterte. Though falling short of directly naming Duterte, her spirited speech served as a comprehensive indictment of the administration’s policy in the South China Sea…. Her keynote address, widely covered by the local media, was followed by an even more spirited speech by interim Supreme Court Chief Justice Antonio Carpio, another leading critic of Duterte’s foreign policy. The chief magistrate, who also oversaw the Philippines’ arbitration proceedings against China, lashed out at Duterte for placing the landmark award in a “deep freeze.” He called on the Duterte administration to leverage the award by negotiating maritime delimitation agreements with other Southeast Asian claimant states such as Malaysia and Vietnam which welcomed the arbitral tribunal’s nullification of China’s nine-dashed-line map. He also called on the Philippines to expand its maritime entitlement claims in the area, in accordance to the arbitration award, by applying for an extended continental shelf in the South China Sea at the UN.152 Another July 12, 2018, press report stated the following: Tarpaulins bearing the words “Welcome to the Philippines, province of China” were seen hanging from several footbridges in Metro Manila Thursday, two years after the country won its arbitration case against China. The red banners bore the Chinese flag and Chinese characters. It is unclear who installed the tarpaulins, which are possible reference to a “joke” by President Rodrigo Duterte that the country can be a province of the Asian giant. “He (Xi Jinping) is a man of honor. They can even make us ‘Philippines, province of China,’ we will even avail of services for free,” Duterte said in apparent jest before an audience of Chinese-Filipino business leaders earlier in 2018. “If China were a woman, I’d woo her.”… In a Palace briefing, presidential spokesperson Harry Roque said enemies of the government are behind the tarpaulins. 152 Richard Javad Heydarian, “United Front Mounts Against Duterte’s China Policy,” Asia Times, July 12, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 63 A report on ANC said that the Metro Manila Development Authority already took the banners down. The tarpaulins sparked outrage among social media users.153 A July 17, 2018, press report stated the following: Protesters held a rally in front of the Chinese Consulate [in San Francisco] before proceeding to the Philippine Consulate downtown, demanding that China “get out of Philippine territory in the West Philippine Sea.” The protest was timed with others in Los Angeles and Vancouver on the second anniversary of the UN’s Permanent Court of Arbitration ruling that China had no right to the territory it was claiming. Filipino American Human Rights Advocates (FAHRA) in a statement celebrated the court’s finding that “China’s historical claim of the “nine-dash line” [is] illegal and without basis.” “China continues to violate the UN’s decision with the backing of its puppet Philippine government headed by President Duterte, who is deceived by the ‘build, build, build’ economic push while China establishes a ‘steal, steal, steal’ approach to islands and territories belonging to the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of the Philippines as determined by UN,” the statement lamented. FAHRA also found it unacceptable that Filipino fishermen must now ask permission to fish in the Philippine waters from “a Chinese master.” “Duterte is beholden to the $15-billion loan with monstrous interest rate and China’s investments in Boracay and Marawi, at the expense of Philippine sovereignty,” FAHRA claimed. “This is not to mention that China remains to be the premier supplier of illegal drugs to the country through traders that include the son, Paolo Duterte, with his P6 billion shabu shipment to Davao,” it further charged. The group demanded that “China abide by the UN International Tribunal Court’s decision two years ago, to honor the full sovereignty of the Philippines over all territories at the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) including the West Philippine Sea and the dismantling of the nuclear missiles and all military facilities installed by the Chinese government at the Spratly islands meant to coerce the Filipinos and all peace-loving people of Southeast Asia who clamor for equal respect and equal sovereignty in the area” among others.154 153 Banners Welcome Visitors to ‘Philippines, Province of China,’” Philstar, July 12, 2018. 154 Jun Nucum, “’China Out of West PH Sea’ Protests Mark 2nd Year of Int’l Court Ruling,” Philippine Daily Inquirer, July 17, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 64 Appendix E. China’s Approach to Maritime Disputes in SCS and ECS This appendix presents additional background information on China’s approach to the maritime disputes in the SCS and ECS.155 Island Building and Base Construction DOD stated in 2017 that In 2016, China focused its main effort on infrastructure construction at its outposts on the Spratly Islands. Although its land reclamation and artificial islands do not strengthen China’s territorial claims as a legal matter or create any new territorial sea entitlements, China will be able to use its reclaimed features as persistent civil-military bases to enhance its presence in the South China Sea and improve China’s ability to control the features and nearby maritime space. China reached milestones of landing civilian aircraft on its airfields on Fiery Cross Reef, Subi Reef, and Mischief Reef for the first time in 2016, as well as landing a military transport aircraft on Fiery Cross Reef to evacuate injured personnel.... China’s Spratly Islands outpost expansion effort is currently focused on building out the land-based capabilities of its three largest outposts—Fiery Cross, Subi, and Mischief Reefs—after completion of its four smaller outposts early in 2016. No substantial land has been reclaimed at any of the outposts since China ended its artificial island creation in the Spratly Islands in late 2015 after adding over 3,200 acres of land to the seven features it occupies in the Spratlys. Major construction features at the largest outposts include new airfields—all with runways at least 8,800 feet in length—large port facilities, and water and fuel storage. As of late 2016, China was constructing 24 fighter-sized hangars, fixed-weapons positions, barracks, administration buildings, and communication facilities at each of the three outposts. Once all these facilities are complete, China will have the capacity to house up to three regiments of fighters in the Spratly Islands. China has completed shore-based infrastructure on its four smallest outposts in the Spratly Islands: Johnson, Gaven, Hughes, and Cuarteron Reefs. Since early 2016, China has installed fixed, land-based naval guns on each outpost and improved communications infrastructure. The Chinese Government has stated that these projects are mainly for improving the living and working conditions of those stationed on the outposts, safety of navigation, and research; however, most analysts outside China believe that the Chinese Government is attempting to bolster its de facto control by improving its military and civilian infrastructure in the South China Sea. The airfields, berthing areas, and resupply facilities on its Spratly outposts will allow China to maintain a more flexible and persistent coast guard and military presence in the area. This would improve China’s ability to detect and challenge activities by rival claimants or third parties, widen the range of capabilities available to China, and reduce the time required to deploy them.... 155 For additional discussions of China’s approach to maritime disputes in the SCS and ECS, see Anders Corr, “China’s Technological and Strategic Innovations in the South China Sea,” Journal of Political Risk, March 2019 (posted March 21, 2019); and James Holmes, “Inside China’s ‘People’s War’ Plan for the South China Sea,” National Interest, November 23, 2019. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 65 China’s construction in the Spratly Islands demonstrates China’s capacity—and a newfound willingness to exercise that capacity—to strengthen China’s control over disputed areas, enhance China’s presence, and challenge other claimants.... In 2016, China built reinforced hangars on several of its Spratly Island outposts in the South China Sea. These hangars could support up to 24 fighters or any other type of PLA aircraft participating in force projection operations.156 In April, May, and June 2018, it was reported that China has landed aircraft and moved electronic jamming equipment, surface-to-air missiles, and anti-ship missile systems to its newly built facilities in the SCS.157 In July 2018, it was reported that “China is quietly testing electronic warfare assets recently installed at fortified outposts in the South China Sea….”158 Also in July 2018, Chinese state media announced that a Chinese search and rescue ship had been stationed at Subi Reef—the first time that such a ship had been permanently stationed by China at one of its occupied sites in the Spratly Islands.159 For additional discussion of China’s island-building and facility-construction activities, see CRS Report R44072, Chinese Land Reclamation in the South China Sea: Implications and Policy Options, by Ben Dolven et al. 156 Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress [on] Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017, May 15, 2017, pp. 9-10, 12, 40, 54. See also the following posts from the Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative (a project of the Center for Strategic and International Studies [CSIS]): “Exercises Bring New Weapons to the Paracels” (May 24, 2018); “China Lands First Bomber on South China Sea Island” (May 18, 2018); “An Accounting of China’s Deployments to the Spratly Islands” (May 9, 2018); “Comparing Aerial and Satellite Images of China’s Spratly Outposts” (February 16); “A Constructive Year for Chinese Base Building” (December 14, 2017); “UPDATE: China’s Continuing Reclamation in the Paracels” (August 9, 2018); “UPDATED: China’s Big Three Near Completion” (June 29, 2017); “A Look at China’s SAM Shelters in the Spratlys” (February 23, 2017); “China’s New Spratly Island Defenses” (December 13, 2016); “Build It and They Will Come” (August 1, 2016); “Another Piece of the Puzzle” (February 22, 2016). See also Greg Torode, “Concrete and Coral: Beijing’s South China Sea Building Boom Fuels Concerns,” Reuters, May 23, 2018; Jin Wu, Simon Scarr, and Weiyi Cai, “Concrete and Coral: Tracking Expansion in the South China Sea,” Reuters, May 24, 2018; Sofia Lotto Persio, “China is Building Towns in the South China Sea That Could House Thousands of Marines,” Newsweek, May 24, 2018. 157 See CRS Report R44072, Chinese Land Reclamation in the South China Sea: Implications and Policy Options, by Ben Dolven et al. See also Alex Lockie, “China Has Jamming Equipment in the South China Sea—and the US May ‘Not Look Kindly on It,’” Business Insider, April 18, 2018; Amanda Macias, “China Quietly Installed Defensive Missile Systems on Strategic Spratly Islands in Hotly Contested South China Sea,” CNBC, May 2, 2018; Reuters Staff, “China Installs Cruise Missiles on South China Sea Outposts: CNBC,” Reuters, May 2, 2018; Asia Times Staff, “China ‘Crosses Threshold’ with Missiles at South China Sea Outposts,” Asia Times, May 4, 2018; Mike Yeo, “How Far Can China’s Long-Range Missiles Reach in the South China Sea?” Defense News, May 4, 2018; Richard Javad Heydarian, “Short of War, China Now Controls South China Sea,” Asia Times, May 8, 2018; “An Accounting of China’s Deployments to the Spratly Islands,” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative (CSIS), May 9, 2018; “China Has Put Missiles on Islands in the South China Sea,” Economist, May 10, 2018; Malcolm David, “China’s Strategic Strait in the South China Sea (Part 1),” The Strategist, May 21, 2018; Steven Stashwick, “China’s New Missiles in the Sptratlys May be a Turning Point,” China Focus, June 13, 2018; Bill Gertz, “China Adds Advanced Missiles to South China Sea Islands,” Washington Free Beacon, June 14, 2018; Paul McCleary, “China Has Built ‘Great Wall of SAMs’ In Pacific: US Adm. Davidson,” Breaking Defense, November 17, 2018. 158 Amanda Macias, “China Is Quietly Conducting Electronic Warfare Tests in the South China Sea,” CNBC, July 5, 2018. 159 Jesse Johnson, “In First, China Permanently Stations Search-and-Rescue Vessel in South China Sea’s Spratly Chain,” Japan Times, July 29, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 66 Use of Coast Guard Ships and Maritime Militia Coast Guard Ships DOD states that the China Coast Guard (CCG) is the world’s largest coast guard.160 It is much larger than the coast guard of any country in the region, and it has increased substantially in size in recent years through the addition of many newly built ships. China makes regular use of CCG ships to assert and defend its maritime claims, particularly in the ECS, with Chinese navy ships sometimes available over the horizon as backup forces.161 The Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) states the following: Under Chinese law, maritime sovereignty is a domestic law enforcement issue under the purview of the CCG. Beijing also prefers to use CCG ships for assertive actions in disputed waters to reduce the risk of escalation and to portray itself more benignly to an international audience. For situations that Beijing perceives carry a heightened risk of escalation, it often deploys PLAN combatants in close proximity for rapid intervention if necessary. China also relies on the PAFMM—a paramilitary force of fishing boats—for sovereignty enforcement actions…. China primarily uses civilian maritime law enforcement agencies in maritime disputes, employing the PLAN [i.e., China’s navy] in a protective capacity in case of escalation. The CCG has rapidly increased and modernized its forces, improving China’s ability to enforce its maritime claims. Since 2010, the CCG’s large patrol ship fleet (more than 1,000 tons) has more than doubled in size from about 60 to more than 130 ships, making it by far the largest coast guard force in the world and increasing its capacity to conduct extended offshore operations in a number of disputed areas simultaneously. Furthermore, the newer ships are substantially larger and more capable than the older ships, and the majority are equipped with helicopter facilities, high-capacity water cannons, and guns ranging from 30-mm to 76-mm. Among these ships, a number are capable of long-distance, long-endurance out-of-area operations. In addition, the CCG operates more than 70 fast patrol combatants ([each displacing] more than 500 tons), which can be used for limited offshore operations, and more than 400 coastal patrol craft (as well as about 1,000 inshore and riverine patrol boats). By the end of the decade, the CCG is expected to add up to 30 patrol ships and patrol combatants before the construction program levels off.162 In March 2018, China announced that control of the CCG would be transferred from the civilian State Oceanic Administration to the Central Military Commission.163 The transfer occurred on July 1, 2018.164 On May 22, 2018, it was reported that China’s navy and the CCG had conducted 160 Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress [on] Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2018, p. 71. 161 See Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress [on] Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2015, pp. 3, 7, and 44, and Department of Defense, Asia-Pacific Maritime Security Strategy, undated but released August 2015, p. 14. 162 Defense Intelligence Agency, China Military Power, Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win, 2019, pp. 66, 78. A similar passage appears in Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress [on] Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2018, pp. 71-72. 163 See, for example, David Tweed, “China’s Military Handed Control of the Country’s Coast Guard,” Bloomberg, March 26, 2018. 164 See, for example, Global Times, “China’s Military to Lead Coast Guard to Better Defend Sovereignty,” People’s Daily Online, June 25, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 67 their first joint patrols in disputed waters off the Paracel Islands in the SCS, and had expelled at least 10 foreign fishing vessels from those waters.165 Maritime Militia China also uses the People’s Armed Forces Maritime Militia (PAFMM)—a force that essentially consists of fishing ships with armed crew members—to defend its maritime claims. In the view of some observers, the PAFMM—even more than China’s navy or coast guard—is the leading component of China’s maritime forces for asserting its maritime claims, particularly in the SCS. U.S. analysts in recent years have paid increasing attention to the role of the PAFMM as a key tool for implementing China’s salami-slicing strategy, and have urged U.S. policymakers to focus on the capabilities and actions of the PAFMM.166 165 Catherine Wong, “China’s Navy and Coastguard Stage First Joint Patrols Near Disputed South China Sea Islands as ‘Warning to Vietnam,’” South China Morning Post, May 22, 2018. For additional discussion of China’s coast guard, see Andrew S. Erickson, Joshua Hickey, and Henry Holst, “Surging Second Sea Force: China’s Maritime Law-Enforcement Forces, Capabilities, and Future in the Gray Zone and Beyond,” Naval War College Review, Spring 2019; Teddy Ng and Laura Zhou, “China Coast Guard Heads to Front Line to Enforce Beijing’s South China Sea Claims,” South China Morning Post, February 9, 2019; Ying Yu Lin, “Changes in China’s Coast Guard,” Diplomat, January 30, 2019. 166 For additional discussion of the PAFMM, see, for example, Gregory Poling, “China’s Hidden Navy,” Foreign Policy, June 25, 2019; Mike Yeo, “Testing the Waters: China’s Maritime Militia Challenges Foreign Forces at Sea,” Defense News, May 31, 2019; Laura Zhou, “Beijing’s Blurred Lines between Military and Non-Military Shipping in South China Sea Could Raise Risk of Flashpoint,” South China Morning Post, May 5, 2019; Andrew S. Erickson, “Fact Sheet: The People’s Armed Forces Maritime Militia (PAFMM),” April 29, 2019, Andrewerickson.com; Jonathan Manthorpe, “Beijing’s Maritime Militia, the Scourge of South China Sea,” Asia Times, April 27, 2019; Dmitry Filipoff, “Andrew S. Erickson and Ryan D. Martinson Discuss China’s Maritime Gray Zone Operations,” Center for International Maritime Security (CIMSEC), March 11, 2019; Jamie Seidel, “China’s Latest Island Grab: Fishing ‘Militia’ Makes Move on Sandbars around Philippines’ Thitu Island,” News.com.au, March 5, 2019; Gregory Poling, “Illuminating the South China Sea’s Dark Fishing Fleets,” Stephenson Ocean Security Project (Center for Strategic and International Studies), January 9, 2019; Andrew S. Erickson, “Shining a Spotlight: Revealing China’s Maritime Militia to Deter its Use,” National Interest, November 25, 2018; Todd Crowell and Andrew Salmon, “Chinese Fisherman Wage Hybrid ‘People’s War’ on Asian Seas,” Asia Times, September 6, 2018; Andrew S. Erickson, “Exposed: Pentagon Report Spotlights China’s Maritime Militia,” National Interest, August 20, 2018; Jonathan Odom, “China’s Maritime Militia,” Straits Times, June 16, 2018; Andrew S. Erickson, “Understanding China’s Third Sea Force: The Maritime Militia,” Fairbank Center, September 8, 2017; Andrew Erickson, “New Pentagon China Report Highlights the Rise of Beijing’s Maritime Militia,” National Interest, June 7, 2017; Ryan Pickrell, “New Pentagon Report Finally Drags China’s Secret Sea Weapon Out Of The Shadows,” Daily Caller, June 7, 2017; Conor M. Kennedy and Andrew S. Erickson, “Hainan’s Maritime Militia: All Hands on Deck for Sovereignty Pt. 3,” Center for International Maritime Security, April 26, 2017; Conor M. Kennedy and Andrew S. Erickson, “Hainan’s Maritime Militia: Development Challenges and Opportunities, Pt. 2” Center for International Maritime Security, April 10, 2017; Andrew Erickson, “Hainan’s Maritime Militia: China Builds A Standing Vanguard, Pt. 1,” Center for International Maritime Security, March 25, 2017; Conor M. Kennedy and Andrew S. Erickson, China’s Third Sea Force, The People’s Armed Forces Maritime Militia: Tethered to the PLA, China Maritime Report No. 1, China Maritime Studies Institute, U.S. Naval War College, Newport, RI, March 2017, 22 pp.; Michael Peck, “‘Little Blue Sailors’: Maritime Hybrid Warfare Is Coming (In the South China Sea and Beyond),” National Interest, December 18, 2016; Peter Brookes, “Take Note of China’s Non-Navy Maritime Force,” The Hill, December 13, 2016; Christopher P. Cavas, “China’s Maritime Militia a Growing Concern,” Defense News, November 21, 2016; Christopher P. Cavas, “China’s Maritime Militia—Time to Call Them Out?” Defense News, September 18, 2016; Conor M. Kennedy and Andrew S. Erickson, “Riding A New Wave of Professionalization and Militarization: Sansha City’s Maritime Militia,” Center for International Maritime Security, September 1, 2016; John Grady, “Experts: China Continues Using Fishing Fleets for Naval Presence Operations,” USNI News, August 17, 2016; David Axe, “China Launches A Stealth Invasion in the South China Sea,” Daily Beast, August 9, 2016; Andrew S. Erickson and Conor M. Kennedy, “Countering China’s Third Sea Force: Unmask Maritime Militia Before They’re Used Again,” National Interest, July 6, 2016; Andrew S. Erickson and Conor M. Kennedy, “China’s Maritime Militia, What It Is and How to Deal With It,” Foreign Affairs, June 23, 2016. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 68 DOD states that “the PAFMM is the only government-sanctioned maritime militia in the world,” and that it “has organizational ties to, and is sometimes directed by, China’s armed forces.”167 DIA states that The PAFMM is a subset of China’s national militia, an armed reserve force of civilians available for mobilization to perform basic support duties. Militia units organize around towns, villages, urban subdistricts, and enterprises, and they vary widely from one location to another. The composition and mission of each unit reflects local conditions and personnel skills. In the South China Sea, the PAFMM plays a major role in coercive activities to achieve China’s political goals without fighting, part of broader Chinese military doctrine that states that confrontational operations short of war can be an effective means of accomplishing political objectives. A large number of PAFMM vessels train with and support the PLA and CCG in tasks such as safeguarding maritime claims, protecting fisheries, and providing logistic support, search and rescue (SAR), and surveillance and reconnaissance. The Chinese government subsidizes local and provincial commercial organizations to operate militia ships to perform “official” missions on an ad hoc basis outside their regular commercial roles. The PAFMM has played a noteworthy role in a number of military campaigns and coercive incidents over the years, including the harassment of Vietnamese survey ships in 2011, a standoff with the Philippines at Scarborough Reef in 2012, and a standoff involving a Chinese oil rig in 2014. In the past, the PAFMM rented fishing boats from companies or individual fisherman, but it appears that China is building a state-owned fishing fleet for its maritime militia force in the South China Sea. Hainan Province, adjacent to the South China Sea, ordered the construction of 84 large militia fishing boats with reinforced hulls and ammunition storage for Sansha City, and the militia took delivery by the end of 2016.168 Apparent Narrow Definition of “Freedom of Navigation” An August 12, 2015, press report states the following (emphasis added): China respects freedom of navigation in the disputed South China Sea but will not allow any foreign government to invoke that right so its military ships and planes can intrude in Beijing‘s territory, the Chinese ambassador [to the Philippines] said. Ambassador Zhao Jianhua said late Tuesday [August 11] that Chinese forces warned a U.S. Navy P-8A [maritime patrol aircraft] not to intrude when the warplane approached a Chinese-occupied area in the South China Sea’s disputed Spratly Islands in May.... “We just gave them warnings, be careful, not to intrude,” Zhao told reporters on the sidelines of a diplomatic event in Manila.... When asked why China shooed away the U.S. Navy plane when it has pledged to respect freedom of navigation in the South China Sea, Zhao outlined the limits in China’s view. “Freedom of navigation does not mean to allow other countries to intrude into the airspace or the sea which is sovereign. No country will allow that,” Zhao said. “We say freedom of navigation must be observed in accordance with international law. No freedom of navigation for warships and airplanes.”169 167 Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress [on] Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2018, p. 71. 168 Defense Intelligence Agency, China Military Power, Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win, 2019, p. 79. A similar passage appears in Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress [on] Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2018, p. 72. 169 Jim Gomez, “Chinese Diplomat Outlines Limits to Freedom of Navigation,” Military Times, August 12, 2015. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 69 A July 19, 2016, press report states the following: A senior Chinese admiral has rejected freedom of navigation for military ships, despite views held by the United States and most other nations that such access is codified by international law. The comments by Adm. Sun Jianguo, deputy chief of China’s joint staff, come at a time when the U.S. Navy is particularly busy operating in the South China Sea, amid tensions over sea and territorial rights between China and many of its neighbors in the Asia-Pacific region. “When has freedom of navigation in the South China Sea ever been affected? It has not, whether in the past or now, and in the future there won’t be a problem as long as nobody plays tricks,” Sun said at a closed forum in Beijing on Saturday, according to a transcript obtained by Reuters. “But China consistently opposes so-called military freedom of navigation, which brings with it a military threat and which challenges and disrespects the international law of the sea,” Sun said.170 A March 4, 2017, press report states the following: Wang Wenfeng, a US affairs expert at the China Institute of Contemporary International Relations, said Beijing and Washington obviously had different definitions of what constituted freedom of navigation. “While the US insists they have the right to send warships to the disputed waters in the South China Sea, Beijing has always insisted that freedom of navigation should not cover military ships,” he said.171 A February 22, 2018, press report states the following: Hundreds of government officials, experts and scholars from all over the world conducted in-depth discussions of various security threats under the new international security situation at the 54th Munich Security Conference (MSC) from Feb. 16 to 18, 2018. Experts from the Chinese delegation at the three-day event were interviewed by reporters on hot topics such as the South China Sea issue and they refuted some countries’ misinterpretation of the relevant international law. The conference included a panel discussion on the South China Sea issue, which China and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries have been committed to properly solving since the signing of the draft South China Sea code of conduct. Senior Colonel Zhou Bo, director of the Security Cooperation Center of the International Military Cooperation Office of the Chinese Ministry of National Defense, explained how some countries’ have misinterpreted the international law. “First of all, we must abide by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS),“ Zhou said. “But the problem now is that some countries unilaterally and 170 Erik Slavin, “Chinese Admiral Contests Freedom of Navigation in South China Sea,” Stars and Stripes, July 19, 2016. 171 Shi Jiangtao, “Future of South China Sea Disputes Depends on Washington, Says China’s Legislature Spokeswoman,” South China Morning Post, March 4, 2017. See also Erik Slavin, “Chinese Legal Draft Could Pose Challenge for [U.S.] Navy in South China Sea,” Stars and Stripes, February 17, 2017; Ben Blanchard, “China Considering Making Foreign Submersibles Travel on Surface,” Reuters, February 17, 2017; “Draft Maritime law Revisions Say China May Bar Foreign Ships from Passing Through Its Waters,” Global Times, February 16, 2017. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 70 wrongly interpreted the ‘freedom of navigation’ of the UNCLOS as the ‘freedom of military operations’, which is not the principle set by the UNCLOS,” Zhou noted.172 A June 27, 2018, opinion piece in a British newspaper by China’s ambassador to the UK stated that freedom of navigation is not an absolute freedom to sail at will. The US Freedom of Navigation Program should not be confused with freedom of navigation that is universally recognised under international law. The former is an excuse to throw America’s weight about wherever it wants. It is a distortion and a downright abuse of international law into the “freedom to run amok”. Second, is there any problem with freedom of navigation in the South China Sea? The reality is that more than 100,000 merchant ships pass through these waters every year and none has ever run into any difficulty with freedom of navigation.... The South China Sea is calm and the region is in harmony. The so-called “safeguarding freedom of navigation” issue is a bogus argument. The reason for hyping it up could be either an excuse to get gunboats into the region to make trouble, or a premeditated intervention in the affairs of the South China Sea, instigation of discord among the parties involved and impairment of regional stability…. China respects and supports freedom of navigation in the South China Sea according to international law. But freedom of navigation is not the freedom to run amok. For those from outside the region who are flexing their muscles in the South China Sea, the advice is this: if you really care about freedom of navigation, respect the efforts of China and Asean countries to safeguard peace and stability, stop showing off your naval ships and aircraft to “militarise” the region, and let the South China Sea be a sea of peace.173 A September 20, 2018, press report stated the following: Chinese Ambassador to Britain Liu Xiaoming on Wednesday [September 19] said that the freedom of navigation in the South China Sea has never been a problem, warning that no one should underestimate China’s determination to uphold peace and stability in the region…. Liu stressed that countries in the region have the confidence, capability and wisdom to deal with the South China Sea issue properly and achieve enduring stability, development and prosperity. “Yet to everyone’s confusion, some big countries outside the region did not seem to appreciate the peace and tranquility in the South China Sea,” he said. “They sent warships and aircraft all the way to the South China Sea to create trouble.” The senior diplomat said that under the excuse of so-called “freedom of navigation,” these countries ignored the vast sea lane and chose to sail into the adjacent waters of China’s islands and reefs to show off their military might. “This was a serious infringement” of China’s sovereignty, he said. “It threatened China’s security and put regional peace and stability in jeopardy.” 172 “Chinese Expert: Freedom of Navigation ≠ Freedom of Military Operations in South China Sea,” China Military Online,” February 22, 2018. 173 Liu Xiaoming, “China Will Not Tolerate US Military Muscle-Flexing Off Our Shores,” Guardian (UK), June 27, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 71 Liu stressed that China has all along respected and upheld the freedom of navigation and over-flight in the South China Sea in accordance with international law, including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. “Freedom of navigation is not a license to do whatever one wishes,” he said, noting that freedom of navigation is not freedom to invade other countries’ territorial waters and infringe upon other countries’ sovereignty. “Such ‘freedom’ must be stopped,” Liu noted. “Otherwise the South China Sea will never be tranquil.”174 A May 7, 2019, press report stated the following: “The US’ excuse of freedom of navigation does not stand because international law never allowed US warships to freely enter another country’s territorial waters,” Zhang Junshe, a senior research fellow at the PLA Naval Military Studies Research Institute, told the Global Times on Monday [May 6].175 A March 17, 2020, press report in China’s state-controlled media stated The US side is using “freedom of navigation” as an excuse to repeatedly enter the South China Sea to flex its muscles and cause trouble, which are acts of hegemony that violate international law, threatening peace and stability in the region, People's Liberation Army (PLA) Southern Theater Command spokesperson Li Huamin said after the US naval activities on March 10, noting that the US warship was expelled by Chinese naval and aerial forces.”176 In contrast to China’s narrow definition, the U.S./Western definition of freedom of navigation is much broader, encompassing operations of various types by both commercial and military ships and aircraft in international waters and airspace. As discussed earlier in this report, an alternative term for referring to the U.S./Western definition of freedom of navigation is freedom of the seas, meaning “all of the rights, freedoms, and lawful uses of the sea and airspace, including for military ships and aircraft, guaranteed to all nations under international law.”177 When Chinese officials state that China supports freedom of navigation, China is referring to its own narrow definition of the term, and is likely not expressing agreement with or support for the U.S./Western definition of the term.178 Preference for Treating Territorial Disputes on Bilateral Basis China prefers to discuss maritime territorial disputes with other regional parties to the disputes on a bilateral rather than multilateral basis. Some observers believe China prefers bilateral talks because China is much larger than any other country in the region, giving China a potential upper hand in any bilateral meeting. China generally has resisted multilateral approaches to resolving 174 “No One Should Underestimate China’s Determination to Uphold Peace in South China Sea: Chinese Ambassador,” Xinhuanet, September 20, 2018. 175 Leng Shumei and Liu Xuanzun (Global Times), “China Warns US Ships to Leave Sea,” People’s Daily Online, May 7, 2019. 176 Liu Xuanzun, “US Intrusions in S.China Sea Can Be Stopped by Electromagnetic Weapons: Experts,” Global Times, March 17, 2020. As shown in Table 2, a U.S. Navy ship conducted an FON operation near the Paracel Islands in the SCS on March 10, 2020. 177 U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) Freedom of Navigation (FON) Report for Fiscal Year (FY) 2017, December 13, 2017, p. 2. 178 See also Tuan N. Pham, “Chinese Double Standards in the Maritime Doman,” The Diplomat, August 19, 2017; Mark J. Valencia, “The US-China Maritime Surveillance Debate,” The Diplomat, August 4, 2017. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 72 maritime territorial disputes, stating that such approaches would internationalize the disputes, although the disputes are by definition international even when addressed on a bilateral basis. (China’s participation with the ASEAN states in the 2002 declaration of conduct DOC and in negotiations with the ASEAN states on the follow-on binding code of conduct (COC) [see Appendix C] represents a departure from this general preference.) Some observers believe China is pursuing a policy of putting off a negotiated resolution of maritime territorial disputes so as to give itself time to implement the salami-slicing strategy.179 Map of Nine-Dash Line China depicts its claims in the SCS using the so-called map of the nine-dash line—a Chinese map of the SCS showing nine line segments that, if connected, would enclose an area covering roughly 90% (earlier estimates said about 80%) of the SCS (Figure E-1). The area inside the nine line segments far exceeds what is claimable as territorial waters under customary international law of the sea as reflected in UNCLOS, and, as shown in Figure E-2, includes waters that are within the claimable EEZs (and in some places are quite near the coasts) of the Philippines, Malaysia, Brunei, and Vietnam. As noted earlier in this report, the U.S. position is that the nine-dash line is “preposterous.”180 The map of the nine-dash line, also called the U-shaped line or the cow tongue,181 predates the establishment of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) in 1949. The map has been maintained by the PRC government, and maps published in Taiwan also show the nine line segments.182 In a document submitted to the United Nations on May 7, 2009, which included the map shown in Figure E-1 as an attachment, China stated the following: China has indisputable sovereignty over the islands in the South China Sea and the adjacent waters, and enjoys sovereign rights and jurisdiction over the relevant waters as well as the seabed and subsoil thereof (see attached map [of the nine-dash line]). The above position is consistently held by the Chinese Government, and is widely known by the international community.183 179 See, for example, Donald K. Emmerson, “China Challenges Philippines in the South China Sea,” East Asia Forum, March 18, 2014. 180 Department of State, A Free and Open Indo-Pacific, Advancing a Shared Vision, November 4, 2019, states on page 23: “PRC maritime claims in the South China Sea, exemplified by the preposterous ‘nine-dash line,’ are unfounded, unlawful, and unreasonable. These claims, which are without legal, historic, or geographic merit, impose real costs on other countries. Through repeated provocative actions to assert the nine-dash line, Beijing is inhibiting ASEAN members from accessing over $2.5 trillion in recoverable energy reserves, while contributing to instability and the risk of conflict.” 181 The map is also sometimes called the map of the nine dashed lines (as opposed to nine-dash line), perhaps because some maps (such as Figure E-1) show each line segment as being dashed. 182 See Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China, 2011, pp. 15 and 39; Peter Dutton, “Three Disputes and Three Objectives, China and the South China Sea,” Naval War College Review, Autumn 2011: 44-45; Hong Nong, “Interpreting the U-shape Line in the South China, Sea,” accessed on September 28, 2012, at http://chinausfocus.com/peace-security/interpreting-the-u-shape-line-in-the-south-china-sea/. 183 Communication from China to the United Nations dated May 7, 2009, English version, accessed on August 30, 2012, at http://www.un.org/Depts/los/clcs_new/submissions_files/submission_vnm_37_2009.htm. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 73 Figure E-1. Map of the Nine-Dash Line Example submitted by China to the United Nations in 2009 Source: Communication from China to the United Nations dated May 7, 2009, English version, accessed on August 30, 2012, at http://www.un.org/Depts/los/clcs_new/submissions_files/submission_vnm_37_2009.htm. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 74 Figure E-2. EEZs Overlapping Zone Enclosed by Map of Nine-Dash Line Source: Source: Eurasia Review, September 10, 2012. Notes: (1) The red line shows the area that would be enclosed by connecting the line segments in the map of the nine-dash line. Although the label on this map states that the waters inside the red line are “China’s claimed territorial waters,” China has maintained ambiguity over whether it is claiming full sovereignty over the entire area enclosed by the nine line segments. (2) The EEZs shown on the map do not represent the totality of maritime territorial claims by countries in the region. Vietnam, to cite one example, claims all of the Spratly Islands, even though most or all of the islands are outside the EEZ that Vietnam derives from its mainland coast. The map does not always have exactly nine dashes. Early versions of the map had as many as 11 dashes, and a map of China published by the Chinese government in June 2014 includes 10 dashes.184 The exact positions of the dashes have also varied a bit over time. China has maintained ambiguity over whether it is using the map of the nine-dash line to claim full sovereignty over the entire sea area enclosed by the nine-dash line, or something less than that.185 Maintaining this ambiguity can be viewed as an approach that preserves flexibility for China in pursuing its maritime claims in the SCS while making it more difficult for other parties to define specific objections or pursue legal challenges to those claims. It does appear clear, however, that China at a minimum claims sovereignty over the island groups inside the nine line segments—China’s domestic Law on the Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone, enacted in 1992, 184 For an article discussing this new map in general (but not that it includes 10 dashes), see Ben Blanchard and Sui-Lee Wee, “New Chinese Map Gives Greater Play to South China Sea Claims,” Reuters, June 25, 2014. See also “China Adds Another Dash to the Map,” Maritime Executive, July 4, 2014. 185 See Andrew Browne, “China’s line in the Sea,” Wall Street Journal, April 1, 2014; Peter Dutton, “Three Disputes and Three Objectives, China and the South China Sea,” Naval War College Review, Autumn 2011: 45-48; Hong Nong, “Interpreting the U-shape Line in the South China, Sea,” accessed September 28, 2012, at http://chinausfocus.com/peace-security/interpreting-the-u-shape-line-in-the-south-china-sea/. See also Ankit Panda, “Will China’s Nine Dashes Ever Turn Into One Line?” The Diplomat, July 1, 2014. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 75 specifies that China claims sovereignty over all the island groups inside the nine line segments.186 China’s implementation on January 1, 2014, of a series of fishing regulations covering much of the SCS suggests that China claims at least some degree of administrative control over much of the SCS.187 An April 30, 2018, blog post states the following: In what is likely a new bid to reinforce and even expand China’s sweeping territorial claims in the South China Sea, a group of Chinese scholars recently published a “New Map of the People’s Republic of China.” The alleged political national map, reportedly first published in April 1951 but only “discovered” through a recent national archival investigation, could give new clarity to the precise extent of China’s official claims in the disputed waters. Instead of dotted lines, as reflected in China’s U-shaped Nine-Dash Line claim to nearly all of the South China Sea, the newly discovered map provides a solid “continuous national boundary line and administrative region line.” The Chinese researchers claim that through analysis of historical maps, the 1951 solid-line map “proves” beyond dispute that the “U-boundary line is the border of China’s territorial sea” in the South China Sea. They also claim that the solid administrative line overlaying the U-boundary “definitely indicated that the sovereignty of the sea” enclosed within the U-boundary “belonged to China.” The study, edited by the Guanghua and Geosciences Club and published by SDX Joint Publishing Company, has not been formally endorsed by the Chinese government.188 186 Peter Dutton, “Three Disputes and Three Objectives, China and the South China Sea,” Naval War College Review, Autumn 2011: 45, which states the following: “In 1992, further clarifying its claims of sovereignty over all the islands in the South China Sea, the People’s Republic of China enacted its Law on the Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone, which specifies that China claims sovereignty over the features of all of the island groups that fall within the U-shaped line in the South China Sea: the Pratas Islands (Dongsha), the Paracel Islands (Xisha), Macclesfield Bank (Zhongsha), and the Spratly Islands (Nansha).” See also International Crisis Group, Stirring Up the South China Sea ([Part] I), Asia Report Number 223, April 23, 2012, pp. 3-4. 187 DOD states that China has not clearly defined the scope of its maritime claims in the South China Sea. In May 2009, China communicated two Notes Verbales to the UN Secretary General stating objections to the submissions by Vietnam and Malaysia (jointly) and Vietnam (individually) to the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf. The notes, among other things, included a map depicting nine line segments (dashes) encircling waters, islands and other features in the South China Sea and encompassing approximately two million square kilometers of maritime space. The 2009 Note Verbales also included China’s assertion that it has “indisputable sovereignty over the islands in the South China Sea and the adjacent waters and enjoys sovereign rights and jurisdiction over the relevant waters as well as the seabed and subsoil thereof.” China’s actions and rhetoric have left unclear the precise nature of its maritime claim, including whether China claims all of the maritime area located within the line as well as all land features located therein. (Department of Defense, Asia-Pacific Maritime Security Strategy, undated but released August 2015, p. 8.) 188 Richard Javad Heydarian, “China's ‘New' Map Aims to Extend South China Sea Claims,” National Interest, April 30, 2018. A similar version was published in Asia Times on April 29, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 76 Comparison with U.S. Actions Toward Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico Some observers have compared China’s approach toward its near-seas region with the U.S. approach toward the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico in the age of the Monroe Doctrine.189 It can be noted, however, that there are significant differences between China’s approach to its near-seas region and the U.S. approach—both in the 19th and 20th centuries and today—to the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico. Unlike China in its approach to its near-seas region, the United States has not asserted any form of sovereignty or historical rights over the broad waters of the Caribbean or Gulf of Mexico (or other sea areas beyond the 12-mile limit of U.S. territorial waters), has not published anything akin to the nine-dash line for these waters (or other sea areas beyond the 12-mile limit), and does not contest the right of foreign naval forces to operate and engage in various activities in waters beyond the 12-mile limit.190 189 See, for example, Robert D. Kaplan, “China’s Budding Ocean Empire,” The National Interest, June 5, 2014. 190 See, for example, James R. Holmes, “The Nine-Dashed Line Isn’t China’s Monroe Doctrine,” The Diplomat, June 21, 2014, and James Holmes, “China’s Monroe Doctrine,” The Diplomat, June 22, 2012. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 77 Appendix F. Assessments of China’s Strengthening Position in SCS This appendix provides additional information on assessment of China’s strengthening position in the SCS. One observer writes in a March 28, 2018, commentary piece that as Beijing’s regional clout continues to grow, it can be hard for weaker nations to resist it, even with these allies’ support. Barely three weeks after the [the U.S. aircraft carrier Carl] Vinson’s visit [to Vietnam], the Vietnamese government bowed to Chinese pressure and canceled a major oil drilling project in disputed South China waters. It was yet another sign of the region’s rapidly shifting dynamics. For the last decade, the United States and its Asian allies have been significantly bolstering their military activities in the region with the explicit aim of pushing back against China. But Beijing’s strength and dominance, along with its diplomatic, economic and military reach, continues to grow dramatically.... Western military strategists worry that China will, in time, be able to block any activity in the region by the United States and its allies. Already, satellite photos show China installing sophisticated weapons on a range of newly-reclaimed islands where international law says they simply should not be present. In any war, these and other new weapons that China is acquiring could make it all but impossible for the U.S. Navy and other potential enemies of China to operate in the area at all.... China’s increasing confidence in asserting control over the South China Sea has clearly alarmed its neighbors, particularly the Philippines, Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia and Brunei, all of whom have competing territorial claims over waters that China claims for itself. But it also represents a major and quite deliberate challenge to the United States which, as an ally to all these nations, has essentially staked its own credibility on the issue. Over the last several years, it has become common practice for U.S. warships to sail through nearby waters, pointedly refusing to acknowledge Chinese demands that they register with its unilaterally-declared air and maritime “identification zones” (which the United States and its allies do not recognize).... None of this, however, addresses the seismic regional change produced by China’s island-building strategy.... ... China sees this confrontation as a test case for its ability to impose its will on the wider region—and so far it is winning.... The United States remains the world’s preeminent military superpower, and there is little doubt it could win a fight with China almost anywhere else in the world. In its own backyard, however, Beijing is making it increasingly clear that it calls the shots. And for now, there is little sign anyone in Washington—or anywhere else—has the appetite to seriously challenge that assumption.191 An April 9, 2018, article from a Chinese media outlet states the following: The situation in the South China Sea has been developing in favor of China, said Chinese observers after media reported that China is conducting naval drills in the region, at the same time as “three US carrier battle groups passed by” the area. 191 Peter Apps, “Commentary: How Beijing Is Winning in the South China Sea,” Reuters, March 28, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 78 “The regional strategic situation is tipping to China’s side in the South China Sea, especially after China’s construction of islands and reefs,” Chen Xiangmiao, a research fellow at the National Institute for the South China Sea, told the Global Times on Sunday. China has strengthened its facilities in the region and conducted negotiations and cooperation on the South China Sea, which have narrowed China’s gap in power with the US, while gaining advantages over Japan and India, according to Chen.192 U.S. Navy Admiral Philip Davidson, in responses to advance policy questions from the Senate Armed Services Committee for an April 17, 2018, hearing before the committee to consider nominations, including Davidson’s nomination to become Commander, U.S. Pacific Command (PACOM), stated the following in part (emphasis added): With respect to their actions in the South China Sea and more broadly through the Belt and Road Initiative, the Chinese are clearly executing deliberate and thoughtful force posture initiatives. China claims that these reclaimed features and the Belt and Road Initiative [BRI] will not be used for military means, but their words do not match their actions.... While Chinese air forces are not as advanced as those of the United States, they are rapidly closing the gap through the development of new fourth and fifth generation fighters (including carrier-based fighters), long range bombers, advanced UAVs, advanced anti-air missiles, and long-distance strategic airlift. In line with the Chinese military’s broader reforms, Chinese air forces are emphasizing joint operations and expanding their operations, such as through more frequent long range bomber flights into the Western Pacific and South China Sea. As a result of these technological and operational advances, the Chinese air forces will pose an increasing risk not only to our air forces but also to our naval forces, air bases and ground forces.... In the South China Sea, the PLA has constructed a variety of radar, electronic attack, and defense capabilities on the disputed Spratly Islands, to include: Cuarteron Reef, Fiery Cross Reef, Gaven Reef, Hughes Reef, Johnson Reef, Mischief Reef and Subi Reef. These facilities significantly expand the real-time domain awareness, ISR, and jamming capabilities of the PLA over a large portion of the South China Sea, presenting a substantial challenge to U.S. military operations in this region.... China’s development of forward military bases in the South China Sea began in December 2013 when the first dredger arrived at Johnson Reef. Through 2015, China used dredging efforts to build up these reefs and create manmade islands, destroying the reefs in the process. Since then, China has constructed clear military facilities on the islands, with several bases including hangars, barracks, underground fuel and water storage facilities, and bunkers to house offense and defensive kinetic and non-kinetic systems. These actions stand in direct contrast to the assertion that President Xi made in 2015 in the Rose Garden when he commented that Beijing had no intent to militarize the South China Sea. Today these forward operating bases appear complete. The only thing lacking are the deployed forces. Once occupied, China will be able to extend its influence thousands of miles to the south and project power deep into Oceania. The PLA will be able to use these bases to challenge U.S. presence in the region, and any forces deployed to the islands would easily overwhelm the military forces of any other South China Sea-claimants. In short, China is now capable of controlling the South China Sea in all scenarios short of war with the United States.... Ultimately, BRI provides opportunities for China’s military to expand its global reach by gaining access to foreign air and maritime port facilities. This reach will allow China’s military to extend its striking and surveillance operations from the South China Sea to the 192 Global Times, “China Has Upper Hand in South China Sea: Expert,” China Military online, April 9, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 79 Gulf of Aden. Moreover, Beijing could leverage BRI projects to pressure nations to deny U.S. forces basing, transit, or operational and logistical support, thereby making it more challenging for the United States to preserve international orders and norms.... With respect to the Indo-Pacific region, specifically, I am concerned that some nations, including China, assert their interests in ways that threaten the foundational standards for the world’s oceans as reflected in the Law of the Sea Convention. This trend is most evident off the coast of China and in the South China Sea where China’s policies and activities are challenging the free and open international order in the air and maritime domains. China’s attempts to restrict the rights, freedoms, and lawful uses of the sea available to naval and air forces is inconsistent with customary international law and as President Reagan said in the 1983 Statement on United States Oceans Policy, “the United States will not, however, acquiesce in unilateral acts of other states designed to restrict the rights and freedoms of the international community in navigation and overflight.”193 A May 8, 2018, press report states the following: China’s neighbors and rivals fear that the Asian powerhouse is slowly but surely establishing the foundation of an Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ) in one of the world’s most important and busy waterways…. Boosting China’s missile defense system in the area would allow it to progressively restrict the movement as well as squeeze the supply lines of smaller claimant states, all of which maintain comparatively modest military capabilities to fortify their sea claims.”194 Another observer writes in a May 10, 2018, commentary piece that All these developments [in the SCS], coupled with the lack of any concerted or robust response from the United States and its allies and partners in the region, point to the inevitable conclusion that the sovereignty dispute in the SCS has – irreversibly – become a foregone conclusion. Three compelling reasons justify this assertion…. First, China sees the SCS issue as a security matter of paramount importance, according it the status of a “core interest” – on par with resolution of the Taiwan question…. Second, the sovereignty of SCS waters is a foregone conclusion partly because of U.S. ambivalence toward Chinese military encroachment…. Third, the implicit acquiescence of ASEAN [Association of Southeast Asian Nations] states toward China’s moves in the SCS has strengthened its position that all features and waters within the “nine-dashed line” belongs to Beijing…. The above three factors – Beijing’s sharpened focus on national security, lack of American resolve to balance China in the SCS, and ASEAN’s prioritization of peace and stability over sovereignty considerations – have contributed to the bleak state of affairs today…. From the realist perspective, as Beijing accrues naval dominance in the SCS, the rules meant to regulate its behavior are likely to matter less and less—underscoring the geopolitical truism that ‘might is right.’ While China foreswears the use of coercive force on its Southeast Asian neighbors and may indeed have no offensive intentions today, it has now placed itself in a position to do so in future. In other words, while it had no capacity nor intent to threaten Southeast Asian states previously, it has developed the requisite capabilities today.195 193 Advance Policy Questions for Admiral Philip Davidson, USN Expected Nominee for Commander, U.S. Pacific Command, pp. 8. 16. 17. 18, 19, and 43. See also Hannah Beech, “China’s Sea Control Is a Done Deal, ‘Short of War With the U.S.,” New York Times, September 20, 2018. 194 Richard Javad Heydarian, “Short of War, China Now Controls South China Sea,” Asia Times, May 8, 2018. 195 Jansen Tham, “Is the South China Sea Dispute a Foregone Conclusion?” The Diplomat, May 10, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 80 Another observer writes in a separate May 10, 2018, commentary piece that the South China Sea is being increasingly dominated militarily by China at both its eastern and western ends. This is what researchers at the US Naval War College meant when they told the author that Chinese militarization activities in the region are an attempt to create the equivalent of a “strategic strait” in the South China Sea. In other words, through the more or less permanent deployment of Chinese military power at both extreme ends of the South China Sea – Hainan and Woody Island in the west, and the new (and newly militarized) artificial islands in the east – Beijing is seeking to transform the South China Sea from an international SLOC into a Chinese-controlled waterway and a strategic chokepoint for other countries…. This amalgamation of force means that China’s decades-long “creeping assertiveness” in this particular body of water has become a full-blown offensive. What all this means is that China is well on its way toward turning the South China Sea in a zone of anti-access/area denial (A2/AD). This means keeping military competitors (particularly the US Navy) out of the region, or seriously impeding their freedom of action inside it.196 A June 1, 2018, press report states the following: Through its navy, coast guard, a loose collection of armed fishing vessels, and a network of military bases built on artificial islands, Beijing has gained de facto control of the South China Sea, a panel of Indo-Pacific security experts said Friday. And the implications of that control—militarily, economically, diplomatically—are far-reaching for the United States and its partners and allies in the region. “Every vessel [sent on a freedom of navigation transit] is shadowed” by a Chinese vessel, showing Beijing’s ability to respond quickly events in areas it considers its own, retired Marine Lt. Gen. Wallace “Chip” Gregson said during an American Enterprise Institute forum.197 Another observer writes in a June 5, 2018, commentary piece that It’s over in the South China Sea. The United States just hasn’t figured it out yet…. It is past time for the United States to figure out what matters in its relationship with China, and to make difficult choices about which values have to be defended, and which can be compromised.198 A June 21, 2018, editorial states the following: America’s defence secretary, James Mattis, promised “larger consequences” if China does not change track [in the SCS]. Yet for now [Chinese President Xi Jinping], while blaming America’s own “militarisation” as the source of tension, must feel he has accomplished much. He has a chokehold on one of the world’s busiest shipping routes and is in a position to make good on China’s claims to the sea’s oil, gas and fish. He has gained strategic depth in any conflict over Taiwan. And, through the sheer fact of possession, he has underpinned China’s fatuous historical claims to the South China Sea. To his people, Mr Xi can paint it all as a return to the rightful order. Right now, it is not clear what the larger consequences of that might be.199 Another observer writes in a July 17, 2018, commentary piece that 196 Richard A. Bitzinger, “Why Beijing is Militarizing the South China Sea,” Asia Times, May 10, 2018. 197 John Grady, “Panel: Chinese Navy, Maritime Militia Has Given Beijing De Facto Control of the South China Sea,” USNI News, June 1, 2018. 198 Robert Farley, “The South China Sea Conundrum for the United States,” The Diplomat, June 5, 2018. 199 “China Has Militarised the South China Sea and Got Away with It,” Economist, June 21, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 81 Two years after an international tribunal rejected expansive Chinese claims to the South China Sea, Beijing is consolidating control over the area and its resources. While the U.S. defends the right to freedom of navigation, it has failed to support the rights of neighboring countries under the tribunal’s ruling. As a result, Southeast Asian countries are bowing to Beijing’s demands…. In late July 2017, Beijing threatened Vietnam with military action if it did not stop oil and gas exploration in Vietnam’s exclusive economic zone, according to a report by the BBC’s Bill Hayton. Hanoi stopped drilling. Earlier this year, Vietnam again attempted to drill, and Beijing issued similar warnings…. Other countries, including the U.S., failed to express support for Vietnam or condemn China’s threats. Beijing has also pressured Brunei, Malaysia and the Philippines to agree to “joint development” in their exclusive economic zones—a term that suggests legitimate overlapping claims. Meanwhile China is accelerating its militarization of the South China Sea. In April, it deployed antiship cruise missiles, surface-to-air missiles and electronic jammers to artificial islands constructed on Fiery Cross Reef, Subi Reef and Mischief Reef. In May, it landed long-range bombers on Woody Island. The Trump administration’s failure to press Beijing to abide by the tribunal’s ruling is a serious mistake. It undermines international law and upsets the balance of power in the region. Countries have taken note that the tide in the South China Sea is in China’s favor, and they are making their strategic calculations accordingly. This hurts U.S. interests in the region.200 A January 2, 2020, press report states The battle for the South China Sea is heating up. Vietnam. Malaysia. The Philippines. All have drawn lines in the sandbars against China. But it may already be too late. This past year, Vietnam stood its ground over the right to deploy an oil rig within its UN-mandated waters. Malaysia complained publicly of interference by the Chinese coastguard. The Philippines moved to secure its Scarborough Shoal islands. And, all the while, new nations have been joining the Freedom of Navigation pushback over Beijing’s claims to the South China Sea. China’s aggressive military moves have forced members of the traditionally timid Association of Southeastern Nations (ASEAN) to reassess their stance. Many are already focused on modernising their armed forces, with defence spending in the region doubling over the past 15 years. That spending is moving away from counter-terrorism efforts towards higher-level conventional warfare. But nations like Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand are beginning to realise they cannot stand alone. September marked a seismic shift in the region’s thinking. Ten Southeast Asian nations joined the United States Navy in five days of war-games. While it involved only eight warships and four aircraft, it marked an unprecedented step down the path towards regional unity. But Chairman Xi Jinping’s bellicose assertion of his nine-dash-line South China Sea policy is yet to be checked…. “The PRC is currently consolidating and normalising control of the SCS seized in 2015 following 20 years of hybrid warfare,” former ADF intelligence analyst Dr Mark Baily warns in an essay published by the Australian Naval Institute. 200 Lynn Kuok, “China Is Winning in the South China Sea,” Wall Street Journal, July 17, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 82 “Their normalisation phase will include civilian settlement of the artificial military base-islands, establishment of a ‘patriotic tourist industry’ and cynical insistence that the artificial military base-islands it forcibly seized are sovereign territory and therefore possess territorial seas and exclusive economic zones,” he wrote. Their existence represents both a strategic and ideological victory for Beijing. The island fortresses extend the range of combat aircraft, ships and missiles. They also act as surveillance platforms over any shipping that passes through the South China Sea. “China’s facilities have probably already reached a level of capability that no outside combatant which enters the South China Sea, however covertly, can be completely confident it is not being tracked,” says Professor James Goldrick of UNSW Canberra. And there is danger in thinking of the island fortresses as China’s “great wall of sand”. It entrenches Beijing’s goal of “regarding the waters that lie between them and the mainland as Chinese territory”. Whether or not these islands are unsinkable aircraft carriers or immovable targets is irrelevant, Mr Goldrick says. “They’re a very public statement of China’s power under its nationalist narrative of “reunifying a supposed ideal Chinese nation-state on equally supposed ideal historical boundaries”…. As a result, Dr Baily says, regional nations must band together to block China’s next expansionist ambition. “While the danger has been recognised 15 years too late, initiatives such as the Indo-Pacific Maritime co-ordination cell may help prevent losing strategic control of the Indian Ocean.”201 A January 18, 2020, press report states Before assuming his post as commander of the United States Indo-Pacific Command, Admiral Philip S. Davidson issued a stark warning about Washington’s loosening grip in the fiercely contested South China Sea. “In short, China is now capable of controlling the South China Sea in all scenarios, short of war with the United States,” Davidson said during a Senate confirmation hearing ahead of his appointment as the top US military official in the region in May 2018. For many analysts, the dire assessment was a long-overdue acknowledgement of their concerns. Today, there is a growing sense it did not go far enough. Washington’s strategic advantage in the waterway, which holds massive untapped oil and gas reserves and through which about a third of global shipping passes, has diminished so much, according to some experts, that it is powerless to prevent Beijing from restricting access during peacetime and could struggle to gain the upper hand even in the event of an outright conflict with Chinese forces. China, which claims almost the entire waterway, has tipped the balance of power not just through a massive build-up of its navy, they say, but also through the presence of a de facto militia made up of ostensibly non-military vessels and an island-building campaign, the profound strategic value of which has been lost on US policymakers.… “The US has lost advantage throughout the spectrum of operations, from low-level interaction against China’s maritime militia to higher-end conflict scenarios,” said James Kraska, a former US Navy commander who lectures at the Naval War College. 201 Jamie Seidel, “‘We Are Losing Control’: China’s ‘Dangerous’ South China Sea Plan Almost Complete,” News.com.au, January 2, 2020. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 83 “In other words, China has escalation dominance, because it has the power to deter any US turn towards escalation. The US is outmatched in all of the scenarios.”… “The biggest issue of control is maritime awareness,” said Oriana Mastro, an assistant professor of security studies at Georgetown University. “Before China can control the airspace and the water, they have to know what’s there. So when you look at these islands and China says, ‘don’t worry it’s just a bunch of radars and sensors’, for someone who is more military-minded, that is the foundation of control – to be able to identify who is doing what and where.”… Tong Zhao, a senior fellow at the Carnegie-Tsinghua Centre for Global Policy, said Beijing had secured some “initial advantages” in a long-term competition that had only just begun. “China’s capability to mass produce modern naval vessels and advanced coastguard ships at a faster rate than anyone else also contributes to Beijing’s confidence that it can gradually shift the military balance in this region to its favour,” said Zhao. But Zhao stressed that China’s advantages were not set in stone, noting that Washington had the resources to develop powerful capabilities such as new medium- and intermediate-range missiles. “With support from its allies, many of whom are increasingly worried about China’s military domination, the United States can use such new capabilities to threaten the operation of PLA military vessels and aircraft and thus seriously challenge any military domination that China may seek to establish,” he said. Other Chinese commentators have attempted to downplay Beijing’s rising dominance altogether. “The US, in particular, is well aware of the fact that China cannot control the South China Sea,” said Hu Bo, director of the Centre for Maritime Strategy Studies at Peking University, in an analysis published last year by the South China Sea Strategic Situation Probing Initiative. “Yet, it continues to direct domestic and international attention to such a possibility with various policies,” Hu Bo added. Despite US efforts to push back against Beijing, many analysts believe Washington has been slow to take the prospect of Chinese control of the waterway seriously, in particular neglecting the military and strategic significance of its artificial islands. “These bases would likely prove quite useful in the event of armed conflict between the United States and China,” said Zachary Haver, a Washington-based China analyst. The mistaken perception that the islands were of little practical use and could be easily destroyed during a conflict because of their isolated location had fuelled complacency, said Greg Poling, a fellow with the Southeast Asia Programme at the Centre for Strategic and International Studies. “On day one of a conflict, they allow China to control the South China Sea,” said Poling, who recently published a widely shared essay on the War on The Rocks website warning against the “dangerously wrong” conventional wisdom about the man-made features.202 “Because of the islands, the Chinese are positioned in a way that lets them dominate the South China Sea, and the Americans are not. “The Americans would be in a position of fighting into the South China Sea. 202 The article referred to is Gregory B. Poling, “The Conventional Wisdom on China’s Island Bases Is Dangerously Wrong,” War on the Rocks, January 10, 2020. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 84 “It is irresponsible of US planners to talk about these [islands] like they are just sitting ducks or just target practice when they’re definitely not,” said Poling, while stressing his view that China would seek to avoid any military conflict with the US.… Many analysts believe US forces would struggle to destroy the outposts at an “acceptable cost”, requiring massive numbers of missiles and bombs and the diversion of aircraft and vessels needed to fight elsewhere, given that any major confrontation would be likely to occur during a broader conflict in Northeast Asia, possibly involving Japan or Taiwan. With the US lacking any nearby military facilities that could provide groundfire or immediate air cover, its vessels would be vulnerable to China’s advanced missile arsenal, which is widely considered among the most sophisticated on earth. “The nature of warfare is changing rapidly with the development of drones, hypersonic weapons and other new missile capabilities,” said Gordon Houlden, director of the China Institute at the University of Alberta. “It is not easy to foresee how these may affect the utility of fixed island bases. But already [China’s] existing missile technology would make the approaches to the Western Pacific dangerous for US aircraft carriers and other surface vessels.”… James Holmes, a former US Navy officer who teaches at the Naval War College, said policymakers had been caught off guard by China’s creeping control of the waterway due to its use of ostensibly non-military vessels such as fishing boats as a de facto maritime militia. “In 2012, after Scarborough Shoal, I took to including a slide in my South China Sea presentations depicting the fishing fleet as the vanguard of Chinese sea power. It was a laugh line that year and for some time after,” said Holmes, referring to how China took control of the shoal after a prolonged stand-off with the Philippines. “You don’t get laughs any more. But by the time we got serious about the maritime militia and [the Chinese coastguard], Beijing had accomplished most of what it wanted.” Washington’s waning dominance has not gone unnoticed among Southeast Asian claimants also at loggerheads with Beijing. Nearly half of the citizens of Asean (the Association of Southeast Asian Nations) have little or no confidence in the US to provide regional security, according to the State of Southeast Asia: 2020 Survey carried out by the Singapore-based ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute. More than three-quarters of respondents believed US engagement in the region had declined under the Trump administration. At the same time, 54 per cent said they would choose the US if forced to align themselves with either Washington or Beijing, although responses varied considerably by country, with majorities in Thailand, Indonesia, Cambodia, Brunei, Laos, Malaysia and Myanmar favouring Beijing. “While there are concerns that the US may be losing interest or disengaging from the region, there’s also concern in the region about China’s behaviour and long-term strategic intention,” said Collin Koh, a research fellow at the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies in Singapore. “Therefore regional countries still look forward to counting on the US in the South China Sea.” Even if the balance has tipped in favour of Beijing, policy analysts in the US and its allies caution against fatalism. “Beijing will not get its way through international custom as long as navies demonstrate on behalf of freedom of the sea,” said Holmes, who argues the competition is not yet lost. But although the Trump administration appears to have ramped up the frequency of FONOPs, analysts caution against overplaying their impact. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 85 “There have been far too many wild statements from American politicians about the FONOPS being a way to ‘push back’ against China,” said Bill Hayton, a South China Sea expert at Chatham House in London. “FONOPS are a means of asserting, and thereby maintaining, the law of the sea. They aren’t intended to diminish the power of China’s artificial island bases.” There is wide agreement that Washington’s ability to convince allies and partners to join any effort to push back against Chinese control will be key to the future of the waterway. Some suggest these efforts need to include establishing a regular US military presence in Southeast Asia, which would alleviate operational limitations arising from its dependence on far-flung bases in Japan, South Korea and Guam. But such a base appears an unlikely prospect at present, as even Washington’s closest Southeast Asian ally, the Philippines, moves closer to Beijing under populist leader Rodrigo Duterte. “Unlike the Middle East, in Southeast Asia the US can’t rely on local shore bases from which to project power. Vietnam won’t allow it – despite the growing illusions about this in Washington – and nor will the current Philippine government,” said Hayton. “However, all Southeast Asian governments are concerned about China’s bullying behaviour and will continue to facilitate the presence of the US and other navies in the region as a counterbalance.” In the absence of a major new military footprint in the region, Washington could settle for boosting the fighting capabilities of its allies, or forging closer relations with non-traditional partners, although this year’s US presidential election casts some uncertainty over the direction of future policy. “Korea, Australia and the Philippines and strategic partnerships with India and Vietnam should all be leveraged, and the US should integrate and operate with their forces and provide them with higher-end capabilities,” said the Naval War College’s Kraska.203 A January 27, 2020, press report stated China’s recent activities in the South China Sea, which include bullying Vietnam and Malaysia over ocean drilling and ramming Philippine fishing vessels near Scarborough Shoals, top the list of Asian security concerns, a panel of experts said last week. “China is in the driver’s seat” in the region since it has completed its island-building campaign on coral reefs that can support the persistent deployment of coast guard and paramilitary vessels to back up territorial claims, Gregory Poling, the director of the Center for Strategic and International Studies Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative said [on January 22] Wednesday during the CSIS Asia Forecast 2020 panel discussion. “There are literally hundreds of players out there hopped up on nationalism,” Poling adding, explaining it’s not just China who could spark a crisis growing out of a small incident. With Vietnam and Malaysia, there are incentives for China to pave over some of the damage from previous disputes, Poling said. However, he added Beijing is currently taking a more adversarial approach, buoyed by its recent success blocking oil and gas exploration by Hanoi and Malaysia in disputed waters. China appears intent on “harassing in blocks [of the ocean] where drilling has begun,” shutting down those operations, he said. 203 John Power, “Has the US Already Lost the Battle for the South China Sea?” South China Morning Post, January 18, 2020. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 86 The sheer size of the Chinese coast guard and its naval militia make this possible, Poling said. “China has more boats,” and no Asian nation can match it when pressure like that is applied “in a war of attrition.” So far, the United States has remained on the sidelines of these disputes, taking a neutral course of conducted freedom of navigation operations to maintain open passage for all nations through contested waters. If push came to shove, say between Beijing and Hanoi over mineral exploration and drilling, Poling said the U.S. would make loud protests but would likely avoid a military confrontation. If the dangerous incident involved the Philippines, a U.S. ally, the matter would become more complicated for Washington. Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte has at times tried distancing himself from the United States. But the country’s military and the public strongly favor closer ties to the U.S. over ties to China, Poling said. The U.S. denounced China’s actions during the previous ramming incident, but Poling said It’s unclear what would happen if “another Philippine fishing boat goes down” and “China called our bluff.”204 204 John Grady, “Panel: China Now Well Positioned to Bully Neighbors in South China Sea,” USNI News, January 27, 2020. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 87 Appendix G. U.S. Position on Operational Rights in EEZs This appendix presents additional background information on the U.S. position on the issue of operational rights of military ships in the EEZs of other countries. Operational Rights in EEZs Regarding a coastal state’s rights within its EEZ, Scot Marciel, then-Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, stated the following as part of his prepared statement for a July 15, 2009, hearing before the East Asian and Pacific Affairs Subcommittee of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee: I would now like to discuss recent incidents involving China and the activities of U.S. vessels in international waters within that country’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). In March 2009, the survey ship USNS Impeccable was conducting routine operations, consistent with international law, in international waters in the South China Sea. Actions taken by Chinese fishing vessels to harass the Impeccable put ships of both sides at risk, interfered with freedom of navigation, and were inconsistent with the obligation for ships at sea to show due regard for the safety of other ships. We immediately protested those actions to the Chinese government, and urged that our differences be resolved through established mechanisms for dialogue—not through ship-to-ship confrontations that put sailors and vessels at risk. Our concern over that incident centered on China’s conception of its legal authority over other countries’ vessels operating in its Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and the unsafe way China sought to assert what it considers its maritime rights. China’s view of its rights on this specific point is not supported by international law. We have made that point clearly in discussions with the Chinese and underscored that U.S. vessels will continue to operate lawfully in international waters as they have done in the past.205 As part of his prepared statement for the same hearing, Robert Scher, then-Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, Asian and Pacific Security Affairs, Office of the Secretary of Defense, stated that we reject any nation’s attempt to place limits on the exercise of high seas freedoms within an exclusive economic zones [sic] (EEZ). Customary international law, as reflected in articles 58 and 87 of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, guarantees to all nations the right to exercise within the EEZ, high seas freedoms of navigation and overflight, as well as the traditional uses of the ocean related to those freedoms. It has been the position of the United States since 1982 when the Convention was established, that the navigational rights and freedoms applicable within the EEZ are qualitatively and quantitatively the same as those rights and freedoms applicable on the high seas. We note that almost 40% of the world’s oceans lie within the 200 nautical miles EEZs, and it is essential to the global economy and international peace and security that navigational rights and freedoms within the EEZ be vigorously asserted and preserved. 205 [Statement of] Deputy Assistant Secretary Scot Marciel, Bureau of East Asian & Pacific Affairs, U.S. Department of State, before the Subcommittee on East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate, July 15, 2009, [hearing on] Maritime Issues and Sovereignty Disputes in East Asia, p. 5. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 88 As previously noted, our military activity in this region is routine and in accordance with customary international law as reflected in the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention.206 As mentioned earlier in the report, if China’s position on whether coastal states have a right under UNCLOS to regulate the activities of foreign military forces in their EEZs were to gain greater international acceptance under international law, it could substantially affect U.S. naval operations not only in the SCS and ECS (see Figure G-1 for EEZs in the SCS and ECS), but around the world, which in turn could substantially affect the ability of the United States to use its military forces to defend various U.S. interests overseas. As shown in Figure G-2, significant portions of the world’s oceans are claimable as EEZs, including high-priority U.S. Navy operating areas in the Western Pacific, the Persian Gulf, and the Mediterranean Sea.207 Some observers, in commenting on China’s resistance to U.S. military survey and surveillance operations in China’s EEZ, have argued that the United States would similarly dislike it if China or some other country were to conduct military survey or surveillance operations within the U.S. EEZ. Skeptics of this view argue that U.S. policy accepts the right of other countries to operate their military forces freely in waters outside the 12-mile U.S. territorial waters limit, and that the United States during the Cold War acted in accordance with this position by not interfering with either Soviet ships (including intelligence-gathering vessels known as AGIs)208 that operated close to the United States or with Soviet bombers and surveillance aircraft that periodically flew close to U.S. airspace. The U.S. Navy states that When the commonly recognized outer limit of the territorial sea under international law was three nautical miles, the United States recognized the right of other states, including the Soviet Union, to exercise high seas freedoms, including surveillance and other military operations, beyond that limit. The 1982 Law of the Sea Convention moved the outer limit of the territorial sea to twelve nautical miles. In 1983, President Reagan declared that the United States would accept the balance of the interests relating to the traditional uses of the oceans reflected in the 1982 Convention and would act in accordance with those provisions in exercising its navigational and overflight rights as long as other states did 206 Testimony [prepared statement] of Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense Robert Scher, Asian and Pacific Security Affairs, Office of the Secretary of Defense, before the Subcommittee on East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate, July 15, 2009, [hearing on] Maritime Issues and Sovereignty Disputes in East Asia, pp. 3-4. See also Raul (Pete) Pedrozo, “Preserving Navigational Rights and Freedoms: The Right to Conduct Military Activities in China’s Exclusive Economic Zone,” Chinese Journal of International Law, 2010: 9-29. 207 The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) calculates that EEZs account for about 30.4% of the world’s oceans. (See the table called “Comparative Sizes of the Various Maritime Zones” at the end of “Maritime Zones and Boundaries, accessed June 6, 2014, at http://www.gc.noaa.gov/gcil_maritime.html, which states that EEZs account for 101.9 million square kilometers of the world’s approximately 335.0 million square kilometers of oceans.) 208 AGI was a U.S. Navy classification for the Soviet vessels in question in which the A meant auxiliary ship, the G meant miscellaneous purpose, and the I meant that the miscellaneous purpose was intelligence gathering. One observer states the following: During the Cold War it was hard for an American task force of any consequence to leave port without a Soviet “AGI” in trail. These souped-up fishing trawlers would shadow U.S. task forces, joining up just outside U.S. territorial waters. So ubiquitous were they that naval officers joked about assigning the AGI a station in the formation, letting it follow along—as it would anyway—without obstructing fleet operations. AGIs were configured not just to cast nets, but to track ship movements, gather electronic intelligence, and observe the tactics, techniques, and procedures by which American fleets transact business in great waters. (James R. Holmes, “China’s Small Stick Diplomacy,” The Diplomat, May 21, 2012, accessed October 3, 2012, at http://thediplomat.com/2012/05/21/chinas-small-stick-diplomacy/) U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 89 likewise. He further proclaimed that all nations will continue to enjoy the high seas rights and freedoms that are not resource related, including the freedoms of navigation and overflight, in the Exclusive Economic Zone he established for the United States consistent with the 1982 Convention.209 Figure G-1. EEZs in South China Sea and East China Sea Source: Map prepared by CRS using basemaps provided by Esri. EEZs are from the Flanders Marine Institute (VLIZ) (2011). Maritime Boundaries Geodatabase, version 6. Available at http://www.vliz.be/vmdcdata/marbound. Note: Disputed islands have been enlarged to make them more visible. DOD states that the PLA Navy has begun to conduct military activities within the Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZs) of other nations, without the permission of those coastal states. Of note, the United States has observed over the past year several instances of Chinese naval activities in the EEZ around Guam and Hawaii. One of those instances was during the execution of the annual Rim of the Pacific (RIMPAC) exercise in July/August 2012. While the United States considers the PLA Navy activities in its EEZ to be lawful, the activity undercuts 209 Navy Office of Legislative Affairs email to CRS dated September 4, 2012. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 90 China’s decades-old position that similar foreign military activities in China’s EEZ are unlawful.210 Figure G-2. Claimable World EEZs Source: Map designed by Dr. Jean-Paul Rodrigue, Department of Global Studies & Geography, Hofstra University, using boundaries plotted from Maritime Boundaries Geodatabase available at http://www.vliz.be/vmdcdata/marbound. The map is copyrighted and used here with permission. A version of the map is available at http://people.hofstra.edu/geotrans/eng/ch5en/conc5en/EEZ.html. In July 2014, China participated, for the first time, in the biennial U.S.-led Rim of the Pacific (RIMPAC) naval exercise, the world’s largest multilateral naval exercise. In addition to the four ships that China sent to participate in RIMPAC, China sent an uninvited intelligence-gathering ship to observe the exercise without participating in it.211 The ship conducted operations inside U.S. EEZ off Hawaii, where the exercise was located. A July 29, 2014, press report stated that The high profile story of a Chinese surveillance ship off the cost of Hawaii could have a positive aspect for U.S. operations in the Pacific, the head of U.S. Pacific Command (PACOM) said in a Tuesday [July 29] afternoon briefing with reporters at the Pentagon. “The good news about this is that it’s a recognition, I think, or acceptance by the Chinese for what we’ve been saying to them for sometime,” PACOM commander Adm. Samuel Locklear told reporters. 210 Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress [on] Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2013, p. 39. 211 See, for example, Sam LaGrone, “China Sends Uninvited Spy Ship to RIMPAC,” USNI News, July 18, 2014; William Cole, “Chinese Spy Ship Off Hawaii Keeps Track of RIMPAC,” Star Advertiser, July 18, 2014; Jeremy Page, “Chinese Ship Spies on U.S.-Led Drills,” Wall Street Journal, July 19, 2014; Andrew S. Erickson and Emily de La Bruyere, “Crashing Its Own Party: China’s Unusual Decision to Spy On Joint Naval Exercises,” Wall Street Journal, China Real Time, July 19, 2014; Phil Stewart, “Update 1—China Sends Spy Ship Off Hawaii During U.S.-Led Drills,” Reuters, July 21, 2014. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 91 “Military operations and survey operations in another country’s [Exclusive Economic Zone]—where you have your own national security interest—are within international law and are acceptable. This is a fundamental right nations have.”212 One observer stated the following: The unprecedented decision [by China] to send a surveillance vessel while also participating in the RIMPAC exercises calls China’s proclaimed stance on international navigation rights [in EEZ waters] into question... During the Cold War, the U.S. and Soviets were known for spying on each other’s exercises. More recently, Beijing sent what U.S. Pacific Fleet spokesman Captain Darryn James called “a similar AGI ship” to Hawaii to monitor RIMPAC 2012—though that year, China was not an official participant in the exercises.... ... the spy ship’s presence appears inconsistent with China’s stance on military activities in Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZs).... That Beijing’s AGI [intelligence-gathering ship] is currently stationed off the coast of Hawaii suggests either a double standard that could complicate military relations between the United States and China, or that some such surveillance activities are indeed legitimate—and that China should clarify its position on them to avoid perceptions that it is trying to have things both ways.... In its response to the Chinese vessel’s presence, the USN has shown characteristic restraint. Official American policy permits surveillance operations within a nation’s EEZ, provided they remain outside of that nation’s 12-nautical mile territorial sea (an EEZ extends from 12 to 200 nautical miles unless this would overlap with another nations’ EEZ). U.S. military statements reflect that position unambiguously.... That consistent policy stance and accompanying restraint have characterized the U.S. attitude toward foreign surveillance activity since the Cold War. Then, the Soviets were known for sending converted fishing ships equipped with surveillance equipment to the U.S. coast, as well as foreign bases, maritime choke points, and testing sites. The U.S. was similarly restrained in 2012, when China first sent an AGI to observe RIMPAC.... China has, then, sent a surveillance ship to observe RIMPAC in what appears to be a decidedly intentional, coordinated move—and in a gesture that appears to contradict previous Chinese policy regarding surveillance and research operations (SROs). The U.S. supports universal freedom of navigation and the right to conduct SROs in international waters, including EEZs, hence its restraint when responding to the current presence of the Chinese AGI. But the PRC opposes such activities, particularly on the part of the U.S., in its own EEZ.... How then to reconcile the RIMPAC AGI with China’s stand on surveillance activities? China maintains that its current actions are fully legal, and that there is a distinct difference between its operations off Hawaii and those of foreign powers in its EEZ. The PLAN’s designated point of contact declined to provide information and directed inquiries to China’s Defense Ministry. In a faxed statement to Reuters, the Defense Ministry stated that Chinese vessels had the right to operate “in waters outside of other country’s territorial waters,” and that “China respects the rights granted under international law to relevant littoral states, and hopes that relevant countries can respect the legal rights Chinese ships have.” It did not elaborate. As a recent Global Times article hinted—China’s position on military activities in EEZs is based on a legal reading that stresses the importance of domestic laws. According to China maritime legal specialist Isaac Kardon, China interprets the EEZ articles in the United 212 Sam LaGrone, “U.S. Pacific Commander: Chinese Spy Ship Off Hawaii Has An Upside,” USNI News, July 29, 2014. Material in brackets as in original. See also Paul McLeary, “PACOM Chief: US Not Worried About Chinese Intel Ship off Hawaiian Coast,” (Defense News), July 29, 2014. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 92 Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) as granting a coastal state jurisdiction to enforce its domestic laws prohibiting certain military activities—e.g., those that it interprets to threaten national security, economic rights, or environmental protection—in its EEZ. China’s domestic laws include such provisions, while those of the United States do not. Those rules would allow China to justify its seemingly contradictory approach to AGI operations—or, as Kardon put it, “to have their cake and eat it too.” Therefore, under the Chinese interpretation of UNCLOS, its actions are neither hypocritical nor illegal—yet do not justify similar surveillance against China. Here, noted legal scholar Jerome Cohen emphasizes, the U.S. position remains the globally dominant view—“since most nations believe the coastal state has no right to forbid surveillance in its EEZ, they do not have domestic laws that do so.” This renders China’s attempted constraints legally problematic, since “international law is based on reciprocity.” To explain his interpretation of Beijing’s likely approach, Cohen invokes the observation that a French commentator made several decades ago in the context of discussing China’s international law policy regarding domestic legal issues: “I demand freedom from you in the name of your principles. I deny it to you in the name of mine.” Based on his personal experience interacting with Chinese officials and legal experts, Kardon adds, “China is increasingly confident that its interpretation of some key rules and—most critically—its practices reinforcing that interpretation can over time shape the Law of the Sea regime to suit its preferences.” But China is not putting all its eggs in that basket. There are increasing indications that it is attempting to promote its EEZ approach vis-à-vis the U.S. not legally but politically. “Beijing is shifting from rules- to relations-based objections,” Naval War College China Maritime Studies Institute Director Peter Dutton observes. “In this context, its surveillance operations in undisputed U.S. EEZs portend an important shift, but that does not mean that China will be more flexible in the East or South China Seas.” The quasi-authoritative Chinese commentary that has emerged thus far supports this interpretation.... [A recent statement from a Chinese official] suggests that Beijing will increasingly oppose U.S. SROs on the grounds that they are incompatible with the stable, cooperative Sino-American relationship that Beijing and Washington have committed to cultivating. The Obama Administration must ensure that the “new-type Navy-to-Navy relations” that Chinese Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Wu Shengli has advocated to his U.S. counterpart does not contain expectations that U.S. SROs will be reduced in nature, scope, or frequency.... China’s conducting military activities in a foreign EEZ implies that, under its interpretation, some such operations are indeed legal. It therefore falls to China now to clarify its stance—to explain why its operations are consistent with international law, and what sets them apart from apparently similar American activities. If China does not explain away the apparent contradiction in a convincing fashion, it risks stirring up increased international resentment—and undermining its relationship with the U.S. Beijing is currently engaging in activities very much like those it has vociferously opposed. That suggests the promotion of a double standard untenable in the international system, and very much at odds with the relationships based on reciprocity, respect, and cooperation that China purports to promote.... If, however, China chooses to remain silent, it will likely have to accept—at least tacitly, without harassing—U.S. surveillance missions in its claimed EEZ. So, as we watch for clarification on Beijing’s legal interpretation, it will also be important to watch for indications regarding the next SROs in China’s EEZ.213 213 Andrew S. Erickson and Emily de La Bruyere, “China’s RIMPAC Maritime-Surveillance Gambit,” The National U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 93 In September 2014, a Chinese surveillance ship operated in U.S. EEZ waters near Guam as it observed a joint-service U.S. military exercise called Valiant Shield. A U.S. spokesperson for the exercise stated the following: “We’d like to reinforce that military operations in international commons and outside of territorial waters and airspace is a fundamental right that all nations have.... The Chinese were following international norms, which is completely acceptable.”214 Interest, July 29, 2014. See also Andrew S. Erickson, “PRC National Defense Ministry Spokesman Sr. Col. Geng Yansheng Offers China’s Most-Detailed Position to Date on Dongdiao-class Ship’s Intelligence Collection in U.S. EEZ during RIMPAC Exercise,” (Andrew S. Erickson), August 1, 2014. See also Michael Auslin, “Wishful Thinking on China’s Navy,” AEIdeas, July 30, 2014. 214 Erik Slavin, “Chinese Ship Spies on Valiant Shield, And That’s OK With US,” Stars and Stripes, September 22, 2014. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 94 Appendix H. U.S. Freedom of Navigation (FON) Program This appendix provides additional background information on the U.S. Freedom of Navigation (FON) program. Overview The State Department states that U.S. forces engage in Freedom of Navigation (FON) operations to assert the principles of international law and free passage in regions with unlawful maritime sovereignty claims. FON operations involve units transiting disputed areas, thereby showing that the international community has not accepted these unlawful claims. ISO coordinates State Department clearance for FON operations.215 The State Department also states about the FON program that U.S. policy since 1983 provides that the United States will exercise and assert its navigation and overflight rights and freedoms on a worldwide basis in a manner that is consistent with the balance of interests reflected in the Law of the Sea (LOS) Convention. The United States will not, however, acquiesce in unilateral acts of other states designed to restrict the rights and freedoms of the international community in navigation and overflight and other related high seas uses. The FON Program since 1979 has highlighted the navigation provisions of the LOS Convention to further the recognition of the vital national need to protect maritime rights throughout the world. The FON Program operates on a triple track, involving not only diplomatic representations and operational assertions by U.S. military units, but also bilateral and multilateral consultations with other governments in an effort to promote maritime stability and consistency with international law, stressing the need for and obligation of all States to adhere to the customary international law rules and practices reflected in the LOS Convention.216 A DOD list of DOD Instructions includes a listing for DOD Instruction C-2005.01 of October 12, 2005, on the FON program, and states that this instruction replaced an earlier version of the document dated June 21, 1983. The document itself is controlled and not posted at the website.217 A website maintained by the Federation of American Scientists (FAS) listing Presidential Decision Directives (PDDs) of the Clinton Administration for the years 1993-2000 states that PDD-32 concerned the FON program. The listing suggests that PDD-32 was issued between September 21, 1994 and February 17, 1995.218 DOD states that As part of the Department’s routine presence activities, the U.S. Navy, U.S. Air Force, and U.S. Coast Guard conduct Freedom of Navigation operations. These operational activities serve to protect the rights, freedoms, and lawful uses of the sea and airspace guaranteed to all nations in international law by challenging the full range of excessive maritime claims asserted by some coastal States in the region. The importance of these operations cannot 215 State Department, “Military Exercises and Operational Coordination,” accessed August 13, 2019, at https://2009-2017.state.gov/t/pm/iso/c21539.htm. 216 State Department, “Maritime Security and Navigation,” accessed August 13, 2019, at https://2009-2017.state.gov/e/oes/ocns/opa/maritimesecurity/. 217 The list is posted at https://www.esd.whs.mil/Directives/issuances/dodi/. 218 The website is at http://www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/pdd/index.html. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 95 be overstated. Numerous countries across the Asia-Pacific region assert excessive maritime claims that, if left unchallenged, could restrict the freedom of the seas. These excessive claims include, for example, improperly-drawn straight baselines, improper restrictions on the right of warships to conduct innocent passage through the territorial seas of other States, and the freedom to conduct military activities within the EEZs of other States. Added together, EEZs in the USPACOM region constitute 38 percent of the world’s oceans. If these excessive maritime claims were left unchallenged, they could restrict the ability of the United States and other countries to conduct routine military operations or exercises in more than one-third of the world’s oceans.219 Legal Arguments Relating to FON Operations In assessing U.S. FON operations that take place within 12 nautical miles of Chinese-occupied sites in the SCS, one question relates to whether to conduct such operations, exactly where, and how often. A second question relates to the rationale that is cited as the legal basis for conducting them. Regarding this second question, one U.S. specialist on international law of the sea states the following regarding three key legal points in question (emphasis added):  Regarding features in the water whose sovereignty is in dispute, “Every feature occupied by China is challenged by another claimant state, often with clearer line of title from Spanish, British or French colonial rule. The nation, not the land, is sovereign, which is why there is no territorial sea around Antarctica—it is not under the sovereignty of any state, despite being a continent. As the United States has not recognized Chinese title to the features, it is not obligated to observe requirements of a theoretical territorial sea. Since the territorial sea is a function of state sovereignty of each rock or island, and not a function of simple geography, if the United States does not recognize any state having title to the feature, then it is not obligated to observe a theoretical territorial sea and may treat the feature as terra nullius. Not only do U.S. warships have a right to transit within 12 nm [nautical miles] of Chinese features, they are free to do so as an exercise of high seas freedom under article 87 of the Law of the Sea Convention, rather than the more limited regime of innocent passage. Furthermore, whereas innocent passage does not permit overflight, high seas freedoms do, and U.S. naval aircraft lawfully may overfly such features.... More importantly, even assuming that one or another state may have lawful title to a feature, other states are not obligated to confer upon that nation the right to unilaterally adopt and enforce measures that interfere with navigation, until lawful title is resolved. Indeed, observing any nation’s rules pertaining to features under dispute legitimizes that country’s claim and takes sides.”  Regarding features in the water whose sovereignty has been resolved, “It is unclear whether features like Fiery Cross Reef are rocks or merely low-tide elevations [LTEs] that are submerged at high tide, and after China has so radically transformed them, it may now be impossible to determine their natural state. Under the terms of the law of the sea, states with ownership over naturally formed rocks are entitled to claim a 12 nm territorial sea. On the other hand, low-tide elevations in the mid-ocean do not qualify for any maritime zone whatsoever. Likewise, artificial islands and installations also generate no maritime zones of sovereignty or sovereign rights in international law, 219 Department of Defense, Asia-Pacific Maritime Security Strategy, undated but released August 2015, pp. 23-24. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 96 although the owner of features may maintain a 500-meter vessel traffic management zone to ensure navigational safety.”  Regarding features in the water whose sovereignty has been resolved and which do qualify for a 12-nautical-mile territorial sea, “Warships and commercial vessels of all nations are entitled to conduct transit in innocent passage in the territorial sea of a rock or island of a coastal state, although aircraft do not enjoy such a right.”220 These three legal points appear to create at least four options for the rationale to cite as the legal basis for conducting an FON operation within 12 miles of Chinese-occupied sites in the SCS:  One option would be to state that since there is a dispute as to the sovereignty of the site or sites in question, that site or those sites are terra nullius, that the United States consequently is not obligated to observe requirements of a theoretical territorial sea, and that U.S. warships thus have a right to transit within 12 nautical miles of the site or sites as an exercise of high seas freedom under article 87 of the Law of the Sea Convention.  A second option, if the site or sites were LTEs prior to undergoing land reclamation, would be to state that the site or sites are not entitled to a 12-nautical-mile territorial sea, and that U.S. warships consequently have a right to transit within 12 nautical miles as an exercise of high seas freedom.  A third option would be to state that the operation was being conducted under the right of innocent passage within a 12-nautical-mile territorial sea.  A fourth option would be to not provide a public rationale for the operation, so as to create uncertainty for China (and perhaps other observers) as to exact U.S. legal rationale. If the fourth option is not taken, and consideration is given to selecting from among the first three options, then it might be argued that choosing the second option might inadvertently send a signal to observers that the legal point associated with the first option was not being defended, and that choosing the third option might inadvertently send a signal to observers that the legal points associated with the first and second options were not being defended.221 Regarding the FON operation conducted on May 24, 2017, near Mischief Reef, the U.S. specialist on international law of the sea quoted above states the following: This was the first public notice of a freedom of navigation (FON) operation in the Trump administration, and may prove the most significant yet for the United States because it challenges not only China’s apparent claim of a territorial sea around Mischief Reef, but in doing so questions China’s sovereignty over the land feature altogether.... The Pentagon said the U.S. warship did a simple military exercise while close to the artificial island—executing a “man overboard” rescue drill. Such drills may not be 220 James Kraska, “The Legal Rationale for Going Inside 12,” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative (Center for Strategic & International Studies), September 11, 2015. See also James Kraska, “The Nine Ironies of the South China Sea Mess,” The Diplomat, September 17, 2016. 221 See, for example, James Holmes, “No, China Doesn’t Want Confrontation in the South China Sea,” National Interest, January 29, 2018; Joseph Bosco, “US FONOPs Actually Conceded Maritime Rights to China,” The Diplomat, March 8, 2017; James Holmes, “America’s Latest South China Sea FONOP Did More Harm Than Good,” National Interest, October 30, 2016. For an alternative view, see Julian Ku, “The Latest US Freedom of Navigation Operation Opens the Legal Door to More Aggressive US Challenges to China’s Artificial Islands,” Lawfare, October 24, 2016; Julian Ku, “U.S. Defense Department Confirms USS Decatur Did Not Follow Innocent Passage and Challenged China’s Excessive Straight Baselines,” Lawfare, November 4, 2016. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 97 conducted in innocent passage, and therefore indicate the Dewey exercised high seas freedoms near Mischief Reef. The U.S. exercise of high seas freedoms around Mischief Reef broadly repudiates China’s claims of sovereignty over the feature and its surrounding waters. The operation stands in contrast to the flubbed transit by the USS Lassen near Subi Reef on October 27, 2015, when it appeared the warship conducted transit in innocent passage and inadvertently suggested that the feature generated a territorial sea (by China or some other claimant). That operation was roundly criticized for playing into China’s hands, with the muddy legal rationale diluting the strategic message. In the case of the Dewey, the Pentagon made clear that it did not accept a territorial sea around Mischief Reef—by China or any other state. The United States has shoehorned a rejection of China’s sovereignty over Mischief Reef into a routine FON operation. Mischief Reef is not entitled to a territorial sea for several reasons. First, the feature is not under the sovereignty of any state. Mid-ocean low-tide elevations are incapable of appropriation, so China’s vast port and airfield complex on the feature are without legal effect. The feature lies 135 nautical miles from Palawan Island, and therefore is part of the Philippine continental shelf. The Philippines enjoys sovereign rights and jurisdiction over the feature, including all of its living and non-living resources.... Second, even if Mischief Reef were a naturally formed island, it still would not be entitled to a territorial sea until such time as title to the feature was determined. Title may be negotiated, arbitrated or adjudicated through litigation. But mere assertion of a claim by China is insufficient to generate lawful title. (If suddenly a new state steps forward to claim the feature—Britain, perhaps, based on colonial presence—would it be entitled to the presumption of a territorial sea?) Even Antarctica, an entire continent, does not automatically generate a territorial sea. A territorial sea is a function of state sovereignty, and until sovereignty is lawfully obtained, no territorial sea inures. Third, no state, including China, has established baselines around Mischief Reef in accordance with article 3 of UNCLOS. A territorial sea is measured from baselines; without baselines, there can be no territorial sea. What is the policy rationale for this construction? Baselines place the international community on notice that the coastal state has a reasonable and lawful departure from which to measure the breadth of the territorial sea. Unlike the USS Lassen operation, which appeared to be a challenge to some theoretical or “phantom” territorial sea, the Dewey transit properly reflects the high seas nature of the waters immediately surrounding Mischief Reef as high seas. As a feature on the Philippine continental shelf, Mischief Reef is not only incapable of ever generating a territorial sea but also devoid of national airspace. Aircraft of all nations may freely overfly Mischief Reef, just as warships and commercial ships may transit as close to the shoreline as is safe and practical. The Dewey transit makes good on President Obama’s declaration in 2016 that the Annex VII tribunal for the Philippines and China issued a “final and binding” decision.... The United States will include the Dewey transit on its annual list of FON operations for fiscal year 2017, which will be released in the fourth quarter or early next year. How will the Pentagon account for the operation—what was challenged? The Dewey challenged China’s claim of “indisputable sovereignty” to Mischief Reef as one of the features in the South China Sea, and China’s claim of “adjacent” waters surrounding it. This transit cuts through the diplomatic dissembling that obfuscates the legal seascape and is the most tangible expression of the U.S. view that the arbitration ruling is “final and binding.”222 Regarding this same FON operation, two other observers stated the following: 222 James Kraska, “Dewey Freedom of Navigation Operation Challenges China’s Sovereignty to Mischief Reef,” Lawfare, May 25, 2017. See also Ankit Panda, “The US Navy’s First Trump-Era South China Sea FONOP Just Happened: First Takeaways and Analysis,” The Diplomat, May 25, 2017. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 98 The Dewey’s action evidently challenged China’s right to control maritime zones adjacent to the reef—which was declared by the South China Sea arbitration to be nothing more than a low tide elevation on the Philippine continental shelf. The operation was hailed as a long-awaited “freedom of navigation operation” (FONOP) and “a challenge to Beijing’s moves in the South China Sea,” a sign that the United States will not accept “China’s contested claims” and militarization of the Spratlys, and a statement that Washington “will not remain passive as Beijing seeks to expand its maritime reach.” Others went further and welcomed this more muscular U.S. response to China’s assertiveness around the Spratly Islands to challenge China’s “apparent claim of a territorial sea around Mischief Reef…[as well as] China’s sovereignty over the land feature” itself. But did the Dewey actually conduct a FONOP? Probably—but maybe not. Nothing in the official description of the operation or in open source reporting explicitly states that a FONOP was in fact conducted. Despite the fanfare, the messaging continues to be muddled. And that is both unnecessary and unhelpful. In this post, we identify the source of ambiguity and provide an overview of FONOPs and what distinguishes them from the routine practice of freedom of navigation. We then explain why confusing the two is problematic—and particularly problematic in the Spratlys, where the practice of free navigation is vastly preferable to the reactive FONOP. FONOPs should continue in routine, low-key fashion wherever there are specific legal claims to be challenged (as in the Paracel Islands, the other disputed territories in the SCS); they should not be conducted—much less hyped up beyond proportion—in the Spratlys. Instead, the routine exercise of freedom of navigation is the most appropriate way to use the fleet in support of U.S. and allied interests.... ... was the Dewey’s passage a FONOP designed to be a narrow legal challenge between the US and Chinese governments? Or was it a rightful and routine exercise of navigational freedoms intended to signal reassurance to the region and show U.S. resolve to defend the rule sets that govern the world’s oceans? Regrettably, the DOD spokesman’s answer was not clear. The distinction is not trivial.... The U.S. should have undertaken, and made clear that it was undertaking, routine operations to exercise navigational freedoms around Mischief Reef—rather than (maybe) conducting a FONOP. The first problem with conducting FONOP operations at Mischief Reef or creating confusion on the point is that China has made no actual legal claim that the U.S. can effectively challenge. In fact, in the Spratlys, no state has made a specific legal claim about its maritime entitlements around the features it occupies. In other words, not only are there no “excessive claims,” there are no clear claims to jurisdiction over water space at all. Jurisdictional claims by a coastal state begin with an official announcement of baselines—often accompanied by detailed geographic coordinates—to put other states on notice of the water space the coastal state claims as its own. China has made several ambiguous claims over water space in the South China Sea. It issued the notorious 9-dashed line map, for instance, and has made cryptic references that eventually it might claim that the entire Spratly Island area generates maritime zones as if it were one physical feature. China has a territorial sea law that requires Chinese maritime agencies only to employ straight baselines (contrary to international law). And it formally claimed straight baselines all along its continental coastline, in the Paracels, and for the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands, which China claims and Japan administers. All of these actions are contrary to international law and infringe on international navigational rights. These have all been subject to American FONOPs in the past—and rightly so. They are excessive claims. But China has never specified baselines in the Spratlys. Accordingly, no one knows for sure where China will claim a territorial sea there. So for now, since there is no specific legal claim to push against, a formal FONOP is the wrong tool for the job. The U.S. Navy can and should simply exercise the full, lawful measure of high seas freedoms in and U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 99 around the Spratly Islands. Those are the right tools for the job where no actual coastal state claim is being challenged. Second, the conflation of routine naval operations with the narrow function of a formal FONOP needlessly politicizes this important program, blurs the message to China and other states in the region, blunts its impact on China’s conduct, and makes the program less effective in other areas of the globe. This conflation first became problematic with the confused and confusing signaling that followed the FONOP undertaken by the USS Lassen in the fall of 2015. Afterward, the presence or absence of a FONOP dominated beltway discussion about China’s problematic conduct in the South China Sea and became the barometer of American commitment and resolve in the region. Because of this discussion, FONOPs became reimagined in the public mind as the only meaningful symbol of U.S. opposition to Chinese policy and activity in the SCS. In 2015 and 2016 especially, FONOPs were often treated as if they were the sole available operational means to push back against rising Chinese assertiveness. This was despite a steady U.S. presence in the region for more than 700 ship days a year and a full schedule of international exercises, ample intelligence gathering operations, and other important naval demonstrations of U.S. regional interests. In consequence, we should welcome the apparent decision not to conduct a FONOP around Scarborough Shoal—where China also never made any clear baseline or territorial sea claim. If U.S. policy makers intend to send a signal to China that construction on or around Scarborough would cross a red line, there are many better ways than a formal FONOP to send that message.... The routine operations of the fleet in the Pacific theater illustrate the crucial—and often misunderstood—difference between a formal FONOP and operations that exercise freedoms of navigation. FONOPs are not the sole remedy to various unlawful restrictions on navigational rights across the globe, but are instead a small part of a comprehensive effort to uphold navigational freedoms by practicing them routinely. That consistent practice of free navigation, not the reactive FONOP, is the policy best suited to respond to Chinese assertiveness in the SCS. This is especially true in areas such as the Spratly Islands where China has made no actual legal claims to challenge.223 223 Peter A. Dutton and Isaac B. Kardon, “Forget the FONOPs—Just Fly, Sail and Operate Wherever International Law Allows,” Lawfare, June 10, 2017. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 100 Appendix I. Proposals for Modifying U.S. Strategy This appendix presents a bibliography of some writings by observers who have proposed modifying the Trump Administration’s strategy for competing strategically with China in the SCS and ECS, organized by date, beginning with the most recent item. Patrick M. Cronin and Ryan D. Neuhard, “Countering China’s Laser Offensive, China’s Military and Paramilitary Forces Have Been Employing Lasers With Increasing Frequency Since at Least 2018,” Diplomat, April 2, 2020. Olli Pekka Suorsa, “The Conventional Wisdom Still Stands: America Can Deal with China’s Artificial Island Bases,” War on the Rocks, February 6, 2020. David Lampton and Wang Jisi, “How to Prevent US-China Rivalry from Turning Southeast Asia into a Conflict Zone,” South China Morning Post, January 30, 2020. Matthew Dalton, “Confronting China: Why America Needs a Maritime Strategy for Disputed Waters,” National Interest, January 7, 2020. Patrick M. Cronin and Ryan Neuhard, Total Competition, China’s Challenge in the South China Sea, Center for a New American Security, January 2020, 41 pp. Mackubin Thomas Owens, Bradley Bowman, and Andrew Gabel, “Dangerous Waters: Responding to China’s Maritime Provocations in the South China Sea,” National Interest, December 20, 2019. Ely Ratner et al., Rising to the China Challenge, Renewing American Competitiveness in the Indo-Pacific, Center for a New American Security, December 2019, 64 pp. James Stavridis, “For the U.S., Vietnam Is a Friend in Need,” Bloomberg, November 17, 2019. Anders Corr, “Can Vietnam Be America’s New Ally Against China?” National Interest, November 7, 2019. Gregory B. Poling and Murray Hiebert, “Stop the Bully in the South China Sea,” Wall Street Journal, August 28, 2019. Doug Bandow, “Is Manila Worth American Lives? The Philippines Might Be a Nice Place to Visit. But It Isn’t a Nation Whose Security America Should Guarantee,” National Interest, August 4, 2019. Roy Draa, “Localized Sea Denial: Countering Chinese Aggression in the South China Sea,” Center for International Maritime Security (CIMSEC), July 22, 2019. Richard Heydarian, “Why China’s ‘Militarisation’ of the South China Sea Needs a Review by the Philippines-US Alliance,” South China Morning Post, July 20, 2019. Richard Javad Heydarian, “The Reed Bank Crisis: A Call for Upgrading the Philippine-U.S. Alliance,” Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative (AMTI) (Center for Strategic and International Studies [CSIS]), July 10, 2019. Michael O’Hanlon, “The Challenge of Confronting China Over a Gray Zone Crisis,” National Interest, July 9, 2019. Patrick M. Cronin, “Maritime Order and America’s Indo-Pacific Strategy,” Center for International Maritime Security (CIMSEC), July 1, 2019. Michael Peck, “Here’s A (Military) Solution to China’s Vast Claims in the South China Sea, America Should Sell High-Tech Rockets to the Philippines?” National Interest, May 18, 2019. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 101 Prashanth Parameswaran, “Andrew Erickson and Ryan Martinson on China and the Maritime Gray Zone,” Diplomat, May 14, 2019. Hunter Stires, “Why We Defend Free Seas: Why China’s South China Sea Challenge Matters,” National Interest, May 6, 2009. (Also published as Hunter Stires, “Why We Defend Free Seas, There Is More at Stake in the South China Sea Than Most Realize,” U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, May 2019.) Hunter Stires, “The South China Sea Needs a ‘COIN’ Toss,” U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, May 2019. Dmitry Filipoff, “Andrew S. Erickson and Ryan D. Martinson Discuss China’s Maritime Gray Zone Operations,” Center for International Maritime Security (CIMSEC), March 11, 2019. Bob Jones, “Freedom of Navigation in an Era of Great-Power Competition,” National Review, March 8, 2019. James Holmes, “Are Freedom of Navigation Operations in East Asia Enough?” National Interest, February 23, 2019. Andrew S. Erickson, “Maritime Numbers Game, Understanding and Responding to China’s Three Sea Forces,” Indo-Pacific Defense Forum, January 28, 2019. James R. Holmes, “Use It or Lose It: Seagoing Nations Must Defend Embattled Waterways,” The Hill, January 27, 2019. Gregory Poling and Eric Sayers, “Time to Make Good on the U.S.-Philippine Alliance,” War on the Rocks, January 21, 2019. Gregory Poling and Bonnie S. Glaser, “How the U.S. Can Step Up in the South China Sea,” Foreign Affairs, January 16, 2019. Zack Cooper and Gregory Poling, “America’s Freedom of Navigation Operations Are Lost at Sea, Far Wider Measures Are Needed to Challenge Beijing’s Maritime Aggression,” Foreign Policy, January 8, 2019. Andrew S. Erickson, “Shining a Spotlight: Revealing China’s Maritime Militia to Deter its Use,” National Interest, November 25, 2018. Eric Sayers, “Assessing America’s Indo-Pacific Budget Shortfall,” War on the Rocks, November 15, 2018. Patrick N. Cronin and Richard Javad Heydarian, “This Is How America and the Philippines Can Upgrade Their Alliance,” National Interest, November 12, 2018. John Lee, Freedom of Navigation and East Asian Stability: Countering Beijing’s Campaign of Historical Revisionism,” Hudson Institute, November 2018, 8 pp. Ryan Martinson and Peter Dutton, “Chinese Scientists Want to Conduct Research in U.S. Waters—Should Washington Let Them?” National Interest, November 4, 2018. Hunter Stires, “Understanding and Defeating China’s Maritime Insurgency in the South china Sea,” National Interest, November 1, 2018. Robert D. Kaplan, “How President Trump Is Helping Beijing Win in the South China Sea,” Washington Post, October 9, 2018. Tuan Pham, “China’s Worth Nightmare: RIMPAC 2020 in the South China Sea?” National Interest, September 29, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service 102 Patrick M. Cronin and Hunter Stires, “China is Waging a Maritime Insurgency in the South China Sea. It’s Time for the United States to Counter It.” National Interest, August 6, 2018. Shigeki Sakamoto, “China’s South China Sea Project Must Not Succeed; The International Community Shouldn’t Quietly Let China Ignore the 2016 [Arbitral Tribunal] Decision.” Diplomat, August 6, 2018. James Amedeo, “America Needs a Clear Strategy to Counter China’s Expansion in the South China Sea,” National Interest, August 1, 2018. Lynn Kuok, “Countering China’s Actions in the South China Sea,” Lawfare, August 1, 2018. Timothy Perry, “Use Maritime-Law Trends to Offset Beijing’s Gains in the South China Sea,” Defense One, July 24, 2018. J. Michael Cole, “It’s Time to Stop China’s Seaward Expansion,” National Interest, July 21, 2018. Lindsey W. Ford, “Was China’s RIMPAC Exclusion An Opening or a Wasted Shot?” East Asia Forum, July 20, 2018. Lynn Kuok, “China Is Winning in the South China Sea,” Wall Street Journal, July 17, 2018. “Washington and Its Allies Need to Contain Beijing,” Financial Times, July 1, 2018. Patrick M. Cronin and Melodiw Ha, “Toward a New maritime Strategy in the South China Sea,” The Diplomat, June 22, 2018. (A similar version was posted as: Patrick M. Cronin and Melodie Ha, “Toward a New Maritime Strategy in the South China Sea,” CSIS, June 21, 2018 (PacNet #42). Paul J. Leaf, “Taiwan and the South China Sea Must Be Taken Off the Back Burner,” National Interest, June 18, 2018. Robert E. McCoy, “A Better Way to Repel China in the South China Sea,” Asia Times, June 8, 2018. Robert Farley, “The South China Sea Conundrum for the United States,” The Diplomat, June 5, 2018. Joel Gehrke, “Marco Rubio: US Must Develop Plan to ‘Destroy’ Chinese Assets in South China Sea,” Washington Examiner, June 4, 2018. Duncan DeAeth, “Taiwan Should Invite US to Open Military Base on Taiping Island, Says DPP Think-Tank,” Taiwan News, June 4, 2018. Julian Ku, “It’s Time for South China Sea Economic Sanctions,” Lawfare, June 1, 2018. Eric Sayers, “Time to Launch a Combined Maritime Task Force for the Pacific,” War on the Rocks, June 1, 2018. Matthew Krull, “America’s Annual Naval Patrol Report and How to Fix It,” National Interest, May 29, 2018. Tuan N. Pham, “A Sign of the Times: China’s Recent Actions and the Undermining of Global Rules, Pt. 3,” Center for International Maritime Security (CIMSEC), May 24, 2018. Ryan D. Martinson and Andrew Erickson, “Re-Orienting American Seapower for the China Challenge,” War on the Rocks, May 10, 2018. Ben Cipperley, “In the Era of Great Power Competition, the US Needs to Step Up Its Game,” The Diplomat, May 8, 2018. U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas Congressional Research Service R42784 · VERSION 105 · UPDATED 103 Stephen Bryen, “How to Counter China’s Fortified Islands in South China Sea,” Asia Times, May 5, 2018. Ely Ratner, “Exposing China’s Actions in the South China Sea,” Council on Foreign Relations, April 6, 2018. Shawn Lansing, “A White Hull Approach to Taming the Dragon: Using the Coast Guard to Counter China,” War on the Rocks, February 22, 2018. Dean Cheng, “Wanted: A Strategy to Limit China’s Grand Plans for the South China Sea,” National Interest, January 30, 2018. Hal Brands, “China Hasn’t Won the Pacific (Unless You Think It Has),” Bloomberg, January 5, 2018. Author Information Ronald O'Rourke Specialist in Naval Affairs Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 		2020-05-07T16:33:36-0400
Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Updated April 15, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov R45996 Congressional Research Service SUMMARY Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Over the years, the U.S. military has become reliant on precision-guided munitions (PGMs) to execute military operations. PGMs are used in ground, air, and naval operations. Defined by the Department of Defense (DOD) as “[a] guided weapon intended to destroy a point target and minimize collateral damage,” PGMs can include air- and ship-launched missiles, multiple launched rockets, and guided bombs. These munitions typically use radio signals from the global positioning system (GPS), laser guidance, and inertial navigation systems (INS)—using gyroscopes—to improve a weapon’s accuracy to reportedly less than 3 meters (approximately 10 feet). Precision munitions were introduced to military operations during World War II; however, they first demonstrated their utility operationally during the Vietnam War and gained prominence in Operation Desert Storm in 1991. Since the 1990s, due in part to their ability to minimize collateral damage, PGMs have become critical components in U.S. operations, particularly in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria. The proliferation of anti-access/area denial (A2/AD) systems is likely to increase the operational utility of PGMs. In particular, peer competitors like China and Russia have developed sophisticated air defenses and anti-ship missiles that increase the risk to U.S. forces entering and operating in these regions. Using advanced guidance systems, PGMs can be launched at long ranges to attack an enemy without risking U.S. forces. As a result, DOD has argued it requires longer range munitions to meet these new threats. The Air Force, Army, Navy, and Marine Corps all use PGMs. In FY2021, the Department of Defense (DOD) requested approximately $4.1 billion for more than 41,337 weapons in 15 munitions programs. DOD projects requesting approximately $3.3 billion for 20,456 weapons in FY2022, $3.9 billion for 23,306 weapons in FY2023, $3.9 billion for 18,376 weapons in FY2024, and $3.6 billion for 16,325 weapons in FY2025. Previously DOD obligated $1.96 billion for 13,985 weapons in FY2015, $2.98 billion for 35,067 weapons in FY2016, $3.63 billion for 44,446 weapons in FY2017, $5.05 billion for 68,988 weapons in FY2018, and $4.3 billion in FY2019 for 60,62 munitions. In FY2020, Congress authorized $5.30 billion for 56,067 weapons. Current PGM programs can be categorized as air-launched, ground-launched, or naval-launched.  Air-Launched: Paveway Laser Guided Bomb, Joint Direct Attack Munition (JDAM), Small Diameter Bomb, Small Diameter Bomb II, Hellfire Missile, Joint Air-to-Ground Missile, Joint Air-to-Surface Strike Missile (JASSM), Long Range Anti-Ship Missile (LRASM), and Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile.  Ground-Launched: Guided Multiple Launch Rocket System (GMLRS), Army Tactical Missile System (ATACMS), and Precision Strike Missile (PrSM);  Naval PGMs: Tomahawk Cruise Missile, Standard Missile-6 (SM-6), and Naval Strike Missile. Congress may consider several issues regarding PGMs, including  planned procurement quantities and stockpile assessments,  defense industrial base production capacity,  development timelines,  supply chain security,  affordability and cost-effectiveness, and  emerging factors that may affect PGM programs. R45996 April 15, 2020 John R. Hoehn Analyst in Military Capabilities and Programs Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Background ..................................................................................................................................... 2 Air-Launched Precision-Guided Munitions .............................................................................. 6 Paveway Laser-Guided Bombs ........................................................................................... 6 Joint Direct Attack Munition (JDAM) ................................................................................ 8 Small Diameter Bomb (SDB) and Small Diameter Bomb II ............................................ 10 AGM-114 Hellfire Missile ................................................................................................ 13 AGM-169 Joint Air-to-Ground Missile (JAGM) .............................................................. 15 AGM-158A/B Joint Air-to-Surface Strike Missile (JASSM) and AGM-158C Long-Range Anti-Ship Missile (LRASM) ..................................................................... 16 AGM-88E Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile (AARGM) .................................... 19 Ground-Launched Guided Munitions ..................................................................................... 21 Guided Multiple Launch Rocket System (GMLRS) ......................................................... 21 Army Tactical Missile System (ATACMS) ....................................................................... 22 Precision Strike Missile (PrSM) ....................................................................................... 23 Naval Precision-Guided Munitions ......................................................................................... 24 Tomahawk Cruise Missile ................................................................................................. 24 Standard Missile-6 (SM-6) ............................................................................................... 26 Naval Strike Missile (NSM) ............................................................................................. 27 Potential Issues for Congress......................................................................................................... 29 Figures Figure 1. Inflation-Adjusted PGM Procurement ............................................................................. 1 Figure 2. PGM Operational Usage and Procurement ...................................................................... 4 Figure 3. Potential Chinese Reconnaissance Strike Complex ......................................................... 5 Figure 4. Comparison of Ranges of Military Equipment ................................................................ 6 Figure 5. Paveway II ....................................................................................................................... 7 Figure 6. Loading a Paveway II into an F-35B ............................................................................... 8 Figure 7. GBU-31/32 Joint Direct Attack Munitions (JDAM) ........................................................ 9 Figure 8. JDAM Tail Kits .............................................................................................................. 10 Figure 9. Small Diameter Bomb ..................................................................................................... 11 Figure 10. Model of a GBU-53 Small Diameter Bomb II ............................................................. 12 Figure 11. AGM-114 Hellfire ........................................................................................................ 14 Figure 12. Diagram of an AGM-169 JAGM ................................................................................. 15 Figure 13. AGM-158 Attached to an F/A-18D Hornet .................................................................. 18 Figure 14. JASSM in Flight........................................................................................................... 18 Figure 15. Model of an AGM-88E ARRGM ................................................................................. 20 Figure 16. GMLRS Launching ...................................................................................................... 21 Figure 17. ATACMS Long-Range Precision Tactical Missile System .......................................... 22 Figure 18. Notional Design of PrSM ............................................................................................. 24 Figure 19. Tomahawk Block IV Cruise Missile ............................................................................ 25 Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Figure 20. SM-6 Launching from a Ship ....................................................................................... 27 Figure 21. Naval Strike Missile in Flight ...................................................................................... 28 Figure 22. Illustration of Naval Strike Missile with Attributes ..................................................... 28 Tables Table 1. JDAM Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP ...................................... 10 Table 2. Small Diameter Bomb and Small Diameter Bomb II Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP .......................................................................................................... 12 Table 3. AGM-114 Hellfire Missile Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP .................................................................................................................................... 14 Table 4. AGM-169 JAGM Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP .................... 16 Table 5. JASSM and LRASM Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP ............... 19 Table 6. ARRGM Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP .................................. 20 Table 7. GMLRS Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP ................................... 22 Table 8. ATACMS Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP ................................. 23 Table 9. PrSM Requested and Programmed Procurement ............................................................. 24 Table 10. Tomahawk Missile Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP ................ 26 Table 11. SM-6 Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP ...................................... 26 Table 12. Naval Strike Missile Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP .............. 29 Table A-1. PGM Procurement Cost and Quantities, by Service (FY1998-FY2009) ..................... 31 Table A-2. PGM Procurement Cost and Quantities, by Service (FY2010-FY2020) ..................... 32 Table B-1. PGM Procurement Cost and Quantities, by Program (FY1998-FY2009) ................... 33 Table B-2. PGM Procurement Cost and Quantities, by Program (FY2010-FY2020) ................... 36 Appendixes Appendix A. Prior Year Procurement by Service .......................................................................... 31 Appendix B. Prior Year Procurement by Program ........................................................................ 33 Contacts Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 38 Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction This report focuses on selected precision-guided munitions (PGMs) fielded by the Air Force, Army, Navy, and Marine Corps. Over the years, the U.S. military has relied on PGMs to execute ground, air, and naval military operations. PGMs have become ubiquitous in U.S. military operations; funding for these weapons has increased dramatically from FY1998 to the present as depicted in. In FY2021, the Department of Defense (DOD) requested approximately $4.1 billion for more than 41,337 weapons in 15 munitions programs. DOD projects requesting approximately $3.3 billion for 20,456 weapons in FY2022, $3.9 billion for 23,306 weapons in FY2023, $3.9 billion for 18,376 weapons in FY2024, and $3.6 billion for 16,325 weapons in FY2025.1 Figure 1. Inflation-Adjusted PGM Procurement Guided Missiles, Bombs and Rockets from FY1998-FY2025 Source: Department of Defense Budget FY2000-2020 P-1 Procurement budget requests, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Budget-Materials/, Department of Defense National Defense Budget Estimate for FY2020 pp. 58-59, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2020/FY20_Green_Book.pdf, Air Force FY2020 Missile procurement budget justifications; Army FY2020 Missile procurement budget justifications; Navy FY2020 Weapons procurement budget justifications. Notes: FY1998 through FY2020 totals are actual dollars appropriated. FY2021 is the requested amount. FY2022 through FY2025 are projected amounts. Congress, through the defense authorization and appropriations bills, has historically exercised its role in the decision to approve, reject, or modify DOD’s proposals for PGMs. In addition, these programs pose a number of potential oversight issues for Congress. Congress’s decisions on these issues could affect future U.S. military capabilities and funding requirements. Potential issues for Congress include 1 Air Force FY2020 Missile Procurement budget justifications; Army FY2020 Missile Procurement budget justifications; Navy FY2020 Weapons Procurement budget justifications. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 2  planned procurement quantities and stockpile assessments,  defense industrial base production capacity,  development timelines,  supply chain security,  affordability and cost-effectiveness, and  emerging factors that may affect PGM programs. Background DOD defines a PGM as “[a] guided weapon intended to destroy a point target and minimize collateral damage.”2 In addition to these virtues, PGMs also offer other advantages over unguided weapons, namely range and the reduction in numbers of combat sorties required to deliver the desired effects on the battle field. The main disadvantage of these weapons is cost; particularly long range missiles. PGMs include air- and ship-launched missiles, multiple launched rockets, and guided bombs. Current munitions typically use a combination of radio signals from the global positioning system (GPS), laser guidance, and inertial navigation systems (INS)—using gyroscopes—to improve a weapon’s accuracy to reportedly less than 3 meters (approximately 10 feet).3 PGMs have transformed attack operations from the air; instead of using hundreds of bomber sorties to attack a single target, a single sortie from a PGM-carrying platform can attack multiple targets while minimizing collateral damage. Guided munitions were first developed in the 1940s, when the U.S. Army Air Corps tested radio guidance to glide bombs onto a target.4 Prior to precision guidance, bomber missions reported an accuracy of 1,200 feet; 16% of munitions dropped by crews landed within 1,000 feet of their intended target.5 According to defense analyst Barry Watts, guidance systems showed promise in improving weapon accuracy; however, these systems were not fully fielded during the Second World War. This can partly be attributed to technological challenges in developing guidance systems, as well as relatively large unit costs per munition used. Guidance systems during this era used television signals, and required a chase aircraft to provide command and control for the weapon to strike its target. DOD continued to develop PGMs through the 1950s and 1960s, where they gained prominence during the Vietnam War with the introduction of the laser-guided bomb. Laser-guided bombs became a preferred munition for bombing operations; an Air Force study in 1973 found that the U.S. military used more than 10,500 laser-guided bombs the previous year, with 5,107 weapons achieving a direct hit and another 4,000 achieving a circular error probable of 25 feet.6 During the 2 Department of Defense, DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, July 2019, at https://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Doctrine/pubs/dictionary.pdf/. 3 IHS Janes, “GBU-39/B Small Diameter Bomb (SDB I), GBU-39B/B Laser SDB (LSDB),” June 7, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw9077-jalw. 4 Barry D. Watts, Six Decades of Guided Munitions and Battle Networks: Progress and Prospects, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, Washington, DC, March 2007, at https://csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/2007.03.01-Six-Decades-Of-Guided-Weapons.pdf. 5 John T. Correll, “Daylight Precision Bombing,” Air Force Magazine, October 2008, at http://www.airforcemag.com/MagazineArchive/Pages/2008/October%202008/1008daylight.aspx. 6 Circular error probable is the metric used to identify how accurate a specific munition is. This metric measures the distance 50% of a type of weapon will land from the aim point. Barry D. Watts, Six Decades of Guided Munitions and Battle Networks: Progress and Prospects, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, Washington, DC, March Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 3 1970s and 1980s, all of the military services developed guided missiles capable of attacking fixed and moving targets. Laser-guided bombs gained prominence during Operation Desert Storm in 1991. Although PGMs represented only 6% of the total munitions used during the campaign,7 they struck a number of critical targets, reduced the number of combat sorties required, and limited collateral damage to civilian structures.8 Operations over the past decade in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria have demonstrated DOD’s increasing reliance on PGMs and how important they have become for modern military operations. The Air Force reports that nearly 139,000 weapons have been used in combat operations in the Middle East since 2014.9 Counter-Islamic State (IS) operations in Iraq and Syria have used numerous weapons: in 2015, coalition air forces used more than 28,000 weapons; in 2016, the campaign used an additional 30,700 weapons; and in 2017 (the height of operations), the campaign used 39,500 weapons (see Figure 2 for a graphical representation of operational usage compared to DOD procurement). Nearly all of the weapons employed were PGMs, particularly Joint Direct Attack Munitions (JDAMs) and Hellfire Missiles. 2007, pp. 9-10, at https://csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/2007.03.01-Six-Decades-Of-Guided-Weapons.pdf. 7 During Operation Desert Storm, the stockpile of laser guided bombs was limited due to cost. A single Paveway bomb tail kit in 1991 cost approximately $20,000, a reduction from $40,000 in 1998. See Malcolm W. Browne, “Invention That Shaped the Gulf War: the Laser-Guided Bomb,” New York Times, February 26, 1991, pp. C-1, at https://www.nytimes.com/1991/02/26/science/invention-that-shaped-the-gulf-war-the-laser-guided-bomb.html. 8 Eliot Cohen, Tom Keaney, et al., Gulf War Air Power Study Volume IV: Weapons, Tactics, and Training and Space Operations, U.S. Air Force, Washington, DC, 1993, https://media.defense.gov/2010/Sep/27/2001329817/-1/-1/0/AFD-100927-066.pdf. 9 Air Force Central reports the number of U.S. and coalition weapons used in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria. Air Force Central, “Airpower Summaries,” press release, September 1, 2019, https://www.afcent.af.mil/About/Airpower-Summaries/. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 4 Figure 2. PGM Operational Usage and Procurement Operational Usage in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria Source: Department of Defense Budget FY2000-2021 P-1 Procurement budget requests, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Budget-Materials/; Air Force FY2021 missile procurement budget justifications; Army FY2021 missile procurement budget justifications; Navy FY2021 weapons procurement budget justifications, and Air Forces Central Air Power Summary. Notes: Bomb procurement includes JDAM, Small Diameter Bomb, and Small Diameter Bomb II. Missile procurement includes Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile, Army Tactical Missile System, Guided Multiple Launch Rocket System, Hellfire, Joint Air-to-Surface Strike Missile, Long Range Anti-Ship Missile, and Tomahawk. * denotes the Administration’s request, ** denotes programmed funding and quantities. In addition to PGM use in current operations, the proliferation of anti-access/area denial (A2/AD) systems is likely to increase the operational utility of PGMs.10 Anti-access systems can be defined as capabilities “associated with denying access to major fixed-point targets, especially large forward bases.”11 Area denial systems can be defined as capabilities “that threaten mobile targets over an area of operations, principally maritime forces, to include those beyond the littorals.”12 Peer competitors like China and Russia have developed sophisticated air defenses, such as the S-300PMU (SA-20) and S-400 (SA-21),13 the HQ-9 surface-to-air missile (China), the DF-21D and DF-26 anti-ship ballistic missiles (China), and the 3M-54 Kaliber anti-ship cruise missile 10 Jan van Tol, Mark Gunzinger, Andrew Krepinevich, et al., AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure Operational Concept, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, Washington, DC, May 2010, https://csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/2010.05.18-AirSea-Battle.pdf. 11 Jan Van Tol et al., AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure Operational Concept, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, Washington, DC, May 18, 2010, p. 1, https://csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/2010.05.18-AirSea-Battle.pdf. 12 Jan Van Tol et al., AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure Operational Concept, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, Washington, DC, May 18, 2010, p. 1, https://csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/2010.05.18-AirSea-Battle.pdf. 13 According to IHS Janes, the S-400 has a maximum range of 400 kilometers. IHS Janes “S-400,” October 7, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jlad0593-jaad. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 5 (Russia).14 Figure 3 illustrates ranges of potential A2/AD systems. These systems outrange U.S. weapons systems at what experts assess as unacceptable risk—some of these weapons have reported ranges in excess of 1,000 nautical miles.15 As a result, U.S. ships and aircraft would need to engage targets at long ranges in order to not put themselves in danger. For instance, naval ships could be threatened at ranges of 809 nautical miles from bases that field DF-21D anti-ship ballistic missiles.16 Figure 3. Potential Chinese Reconnaissance Strike Complex Source: Bryan Clark, Peter Haynes, and Bryan McGrath, et al., Restoring American Seapower: A New Fleet Architecture for the United States Navy, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, Washington, DC, February 9, 2017, p. 11, https://csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/CSBA6292-Fleet_Architecture_Study_REPRINT_web.pdf. Note: The figure notes state “Data to build this chart derived from OSD, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2016.” The effectiveness of these missiles is often debated, as is the amount of risk an anti-ship ballistic missile presents to naval forces. Some analysts argue that in a combat situation, aircraft carriers would not enter these weapons’ engagement zones because of the threat. Others argue that while there is some risk posed to naval forces, aircraft carriers and major surface combatants would nonetheless be able to operate effectively. Similarly, an S-400 (SA-21) presents risks to aircraft at ranges of up to 215 nautical miles. Many weapons in the U.S. inventory have relatively short 14 According to IHS Janes, the DF-21D has a range of 1,500 kilometers, and the DF-26 has a range of approximately 4,000 kilometers. See IHS Janes “DF-21,” February 21, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jsws0411-jsws, and IHS Janes “DF-26,” February 1, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jswsa399-jsws. 15 Jan van Tol, Mark Gunzinger, Andrew Krepinevich, et al., AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure Operational Concept, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, Washington, DC, May 2010, https://csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/2010.05.18-AirSea-Battle.pdf. 16 See IHS Janes “DF-21,” February 21, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jsws0411-jsws. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 6 ranges.17 Figure 4 illustrates the impact that A2/AD systems have on potential military operations. Some analysts argue that U.S. forces would substantially increase their operational risk at ranges in excess of 500 nautical miles (NM).18 Figure 4. Comparison of Ranges of Military Equipment U.S. Military Aircraft vs. Adversary Drones and Missiles Source: https://warontherocks.com/2018/03/america-is-well-within-range-of-a-big-surprise-so-why-cant-it-see/. Air-Launched Precision-Guided Munitions Paveway Laser-Guided Bombs The Paveway is a family of guidance kits that attach to unguided bombs. The assembly includes a guidance seeker on the nose of the bomb, which looks for a laser to mark a target, and a tail kit to guide the bomb onto the target. The Paveway series was originally developed during the Vietnam War to enable tactical aircraft—like the F-4 Phantom and the A-6 Intruder—to deliver precise munitions onto a target.19 Paveway has received several upgrades, with the development of Paveway III (in the 1990s), which improves low-altitude guidance,20 and Paveway IV (in the late 1990s), which adds satellite guidance to improve accuracy.21 The U.S. military predominately 17 Guided bombs have a maximum range of 40 nautical miles; longer-range missiles typically have a range around 150-500 nautical miles. 18 Jan van Tol, Mark Gunzinger, Andrew Krepinevich, et al., AirSea Battle: A Point-of-Departure Operational Concept, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, Washington, DC, May 2010, https://csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/2010.05.18-AirSea-Battle.pdf. 19 IHS Janes “GBU-10/12/16/58 Paveway II,” October 17, 2018, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalwa051-jalw. 20 IHS Janes “GBU-22, GBU-24, GBU-27 Paveway III, and Enhanced Paveway III,” September 10, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3671-jalw. 21 IHS Janes “Paveway IV (PGB),” February 13, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw9213-jalw. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 7 uses Paveway II (see Figure 5 and Figure 6) and Paveway III kits; Paveway IV is used exclusively by foreign militaries. According to IHS Janes, Raytheon has produced more than 350,000 Paveway kits, with Lockheed Martin producing an additional 200,000 kits.22 Funding for Paveway procurement appears in the Air Force’s General Purpose Bomb line item; however, the Air Force does not report procurement quantities in its budget justification documentation.23 DOD has exported Paveway II kits to more than 30 countries, and exported Paveway III kits to at least 9 countries. Paveway IV is used by the United Kingdom, the Philippines, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar.24 Figure 5. Paveway II Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/2d/Paveway_II_p1230135.jpg. 22 IHS Janes “GBU-10/12/16/58 Paveway II,” October 17, 2018, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalwa051-jalw. 23 U.S. Air Force FY2020 Procurement of Ammunition Line Item 353020 General Purpose Bombs, at https://apps.dtic.mil/procurement/Y2020/AirForce/stamped/U_P40_353020_BSA-13_BA-1_APP-3011F_PB_2020.pdf. 24 IHS Janes “Paveway IV (PGB),” February 13, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw9213-jalw. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 8 Figure 6. Loading a Paveway II into an F-35B Source: https://dod.defense.gov/OIR/gallery/igphoto/2001907433/. Note: In this photo, Marines load a GBU-12 Paveway II laser-guided bomb onto an F-35B Lightning II aircraft on the flight deck of the USS Wasp during a certification exercise in the Pacific Ocean, April 18, 2018. Marine Corps photo by Cpl. Stormy Mendez. Joint Direct Attack Munition (JDAM) JDAM modifies unguided bombs—such as the 500-pound Mk-82, the 1,000-pound Mk-83, and the 2,000-pound Mk-84—with GPS guidance. (For a fully assembled JDAM, see Figure 7; for a JDAM tail kit, see Figure 8.) When a JDAM kit is attached, the weapon is designated as GBU-31/32/38 depending on the weight of the bomb.25 These weapons have a reported range of 13 nautical miles.26 The Air Force and Navy began studying how to deliver such weapons in a program known as the Advanced Bomb Family during the 1980s.27 The first JDAMs were delivered in 1997, and underwent operational testing between 1998 and 1999.28 JDAM kits are reported to have an accuracy to within 3 meters (approximately 10 feet).29 The first operational use of a JDAM was during Operation Allied Freedom in Kosovo by a B-2 Spirit bomber. Since their development, JDAMs have been integrated with all U.S. fixed-wing strike platforms. JDAMs have received several upgrades since their introduction into service. One of the major developments has been developing a laser guidance system in addition to receiving GPS 25 U.S. Air Force, “Joint Direct Attack Munition GBU-31/32/38 Fact Sheet,” press release, June 18, 2003, https://www.af.mil/About-Us/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/104572/joint-direct-attack-munition-gbu-313238/. 26 IHS Janes “GBU-31/32/38 Joint Direct Attack Munition (JDAM),” June 18, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3667-jalw. 27 IHS Janes “GBU-31/32/38 Joint Direct Attack Munition (JDAM),” June 18, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3667-jalw. 28 According to the Air Force, approximately 450 JDAMs were dropped during the operational testing phase. See U.S. Air Force, “Joint Direct Attack Munition GBU-31/32/38 Fact Sheet,” press release, June 18, 2003, https://www.af.mil/About-Us/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/104572/joint-direct-attack-munition-gbu-313238/. 29 IHS Janes “GBU-31/32/38 Joint Direct Attack Munition (JDAM),” June 18, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3667-jalw. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 9 guidance. Adding laser guidance enables JDAMs to strike both moving and fixed targets. In February 2020, Boeing announced its intention to develop a “powered” JDAM to provide a low-cost alternative to cruise missiles.30 According to Air Force Magazine, this new JDAM would use a 500-pound bomb, and would be the size of a 2,000-pound bomb. Boeing has not stated a unit cost for this new development. Figure 7. GBU-31/32 Joint Direct Attack Munitions (JDAM) Source: https://www.nationalmuseum.af.mil/Visit/Museum-Exhibits/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/197589/gbu-3132-joint-direct-attack-munitions-jdam/. Note: The GBU-31/32 JDAM on display in the Cold War Gallery at the National Museum of the U.S. Air Force (U.S. Air Force photo). DOD has procured more than 371,000 JDAM kits since 1998, and it plans to procure an additional 75,000 between FY2020 and FY2024.31 According to IHS Janes, the Air Force originally projected procuring 270,000 JDAM kits. Production peaked at 30,000 kits prior to 2007 before declining until 2015. Increased operational use in Iraq and Syria, in particular, resulted in a reduction in JDAM stockpiles, leading to increased procurement from FY2016 through FY2020. Table 1 outlines the FY2020 request, along with the programmed force between FY2021 through FY2024. The DOD projects to reduce JDAM procurement in the future years defense program (FYDP); the current programmed force for FY2021 reduces procurement from more than 40,000 tailkits in FY2020 to approximately 10,000 tailkits in FY2021 and ends the FYDP with approxmately 3,700 tailkits in FY2024. In addition to U.S. military use, JDAMs have been exported to 26 countries, including Australia, Bahrain, Denmark, Finland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Turkey, and the United Arab Emirates.32 30 Tobias Naegele, “Powered JDAM: Boeing’s New Alternative to Cruise Missiles,” Air Force Magazine, February 28, 2020, https://www.airforcemag.com/power-jdam-boeings-new-alternative-to-cruise-missiles/. 31 See Department of Defense Budget FY2000-2020 P-1 Procurement budget requests, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Budget-Materials/. 32 IHS Janes “GBU-31/32/38 Joint Direct Attack Munition (JDAM),” June 18, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3667-jalw. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 10 Table 1. JDAM Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP FY2020 FY2021a FY2022b FY2023b FY2024b FY2025b Grand Total Cost ($millions) $1,039.47 $524.87 $349.99 $321.44 $163.25 $186.71 $2,585.73 Quantity 28,388 20,338 8,675 9,206 3,878 3,878 74,363 Source: U.S. Air Force FY2021 Procurement of Ammunition Line Item 353620 Joint Direct Attack Munition, and U.S. Navy FY2021 Procurement of Ammunition Line Item 0148 JT Direct Attack Munition (JDAM). a. Denotes the Administration’s request. b. Denotes programmed funding and quantities. Figure 8. JDAM Tail Kits Source: https://www.hill.af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/909505/munitions-airmen-key-players-during-combat-exercises-at-hill-afb/. Notes: “Airmen from the 325th Maintenance Squadron, Tyndall Air Force Base, FL., lift a GBU-32 bomb tail section onto the primary bomb body at Hill AFB, UT. The bombs being assembled were later dropped by aircraft participating in exercise Combat Hammer at Hill AFB and the Utah Test and Training Range.” (U.S. Air Force photo by Paul Holcomb.) Small Diameter Bomb (SDB) and Small Diameter Bomb II The Small Diameter Bomb, designated as GBU-39 (Figure 9), is a 250-pound guided bomb. The SDB can use both GPS and laser guidance, enabling it to strike both fixed and moving targets.33 In 1997, responding to improvements in accuracy due to GPS, the Air Force stated a need to develop a smaller bomb to reduce collateral damage. The SDB reached initial operating capability 33 U.S. Air Force, “GBU-39B Small Diameter Bomb Weapon System Fact Sheet,” press release, August 28, 2006, https://www.af.mil/About-Us/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/104573/gbu-39b-small-diameter-bomb-weapon-system/. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 11 in 2006.34 According to the Air Force, the SDB has a range of approximately 40 nautical miles.35 The SDB was specifically designed around space constraints in both the F-22 Raptor and F-35 Lightning II aircraft to enable these fighter aircraft to carry SDBs internally, while protecting their low observable signature.36 Figure 9. Small Diameter Bomb Source: https://www.jber.jb.mil/News/Articles/Article/592933/operational-f-22s-employ-small-diameter-bombs-during-wsep/. Notes: During a Combat Hammer exercise, Alaska F-22 Raptors became the first operational F-22 unit to drop GBU-39 small diameter bombs. Combat Hammer—a weapons system evaluation program sponsored by the 86th Fighter Weapons Squadron—provided an opportunity for an operational unit to employ the bombs in a realistic tactical training environment. (U.S. Air Force photo/Tech. Sgt. Dana Rosso.) The Air Force developed a second small diameter bomb, the GBU-53 laser-guided smaller diameter bomb, or SDB II (see Figure 10).37 The added laser guidance enables the SDB II to strike both fixed and moving targets. SDB II uses Link 16 and ultra-high frequency datalinks, along with infrared guidance, to provide course corrections.38 Development for the SDB II began in 2005, and the Air Force declared initial operating capability in 2019.39 The U.S. exports SDB II to Australia and South Korea as of 2019.40 34 U.S. Air Force, “GBU-39B Small Diameter Bomb Weapon System Fact Sheet,” press release, August 28, 2006, https://www.af.mil/About-Us/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/104573/gbu-39b-small-diameter-bomb-weapon-system/. 35 U.S. Air Force, “GBU-39B Small Diameter Bomb Weapon System Fact Sheet,” press release, August 28, 2006, https://www.af.mil/About-Us/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/104573/gbu-39b-small-diameter-bomb-weapon-system/. 36 IHS Janes “GBU-39/B Small Diameter Bomb (SDB I), GBU-39B/B Laser SDB (LSDB), June 7, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw9077-jalw. 37 The SDB II is a separate procurement line item in both budget justifications and in Congressional authorization and appropriations. 38 IHS Janes “StormBreaker bomb (GBU-53/B SDB II),” July 8, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalwa099-jalw. 39 IHS Janes “StormBreaker bomb (GBU-53/B SDB II),” July 8, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalwa099-jalw. 40 IHS Janes “StormBreaker bomb (GBU-53/B SDB II),” July 8, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalwa099-jalw. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 12 Figure 10. Model of a GBU-53 Small Diameter Bomb II Source: https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalwa099-jalw. The Air Force procures SDBs as of 2019. From FY2005 through FY2019, the Air Force purchased more than 28,000 SDBs for more than $1.7 billion.41 Both the Air Force and the Navy requested more than 7,000 SDBs in FY2020 (the second-largest procurement on the line) for $275 million, and plan to procure an additional 8,400 SDBs from FY2021 through FY2024.42 In addition both services are procuring SDB IIs. Procurement of the SDB II began in FY2018 with 80 bombs, increasing to 1,200 bombs in FY2019. DOD requested 1,900 bombs in FY2020 for approximately $331 million, and it plans to purchase more than 10,500 SDB IIs from FY2021 through FY2024 for $1.6 billion (see Table 2).43 Table 2. Small Diameter Bomb and Small Diameter Bomb II Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP FY2020 FY2021a FY2022b FY2023b FY2024b FY2025b Total SDB Cost ($millions) $273.29 $95.83 $45.48 $45.47 $91.41 $93.05 $644.53 SDB Quantity 7,078 2,462 1,158 1,180 2,435 2,435 16,748 SDB II Cost ($millions) $291.73 $352.14 $388.42 $404.04 $347.41 $309.10 $2,092.84 SDB II Quantity 1,687 1,490 1,749 1,775 1,662 1,376 9,739 41 See Department of Defense Budget FY2000-2020 P-1 Procurement budget requests, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Budget-Materials/. 42 U.S. Air Force FY2020 Procurement of Missiles Line Item SDB000 Small Diameter, at https://apps.dtic.mil/procurement/Y2020/AirForce/stamped/U_P40_SDB000_BSA-2_BA-2_APP-3020F_PB_2020.pdf. 43 U.S. Air Force FY2020 Procurement of Missiles Line Item SDB0032 Small Diameter Bomb II, athttps://apps.dtic.mil/procurement/Y2020/AirForce/stamped/U_P40_SDB002_BSA-2_BA-2_APP-3020F_PB_2020.pdf, and U.S. Navy FY2020 Weapons Procurement Line Item 2238 Small Diameter Bomb II (SDB II), at https://apps.dtic.mil/procurement/Y2020/Navy/stamped/U_P40_2238_BSA-2_BA-2_APP-1507N_PB_2020.pdf. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 13 Source: U.S. Air Force FY2021 Procurement of Missiles Line Item SDB000 Small Diameter Bomb, U.S. Air Force FY2021 Procurement of Missiles Line Item SDB0032 Small Diameter Bomb II, and U.S. Navy FY2021 Weapons Procurement Line Item 2238 Small Diameter Bomb II (SDB II). a. Denotes the Administration’s request. b. Denotes programmed funding and quantities. AGM-114 Hellfire Missile In the early 1970s, the Army developed a requirement for an anti-tank missile, which resulted in the AGM-114 Hellfire (see Figure 11).44 The first Hellfire was introduced into service in 1982 on the Army’s AH-64 Apache, using laser guidance to target tanks, bunkers, and structures.45 Hellfire missiles have a maximum effective range of 4.3 nautical miles. By the mid-1980s, the Marine Corps had introduced Hellfire missiles to its attack helicopter fleet. Hellfire missiles have received continual upgrades over the past decades, including integrating infrared sensors, warheads to target small boats, and integration with the Apache’s Longbow radar.46 During the late 1990s and early 2000s, Hellfire missiles were introduced to the MQ-1 Predator, and later to the MQ-9 Reaper, enabling unmanned aerial vehicles to provide a strike capability.47 Hellfire missiles have become a preferred munition for operations in the Middle East, particularly with increased utilization of unmanned aircraft like MQ-1s and MQ-9s. Hellfire missiles have been exported to a number of countries, including Australia, Bahrain, Egypt, India, Iraq, South Korea, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Taiwan, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, and the United Kingdom.48 The Army and the Marine Corps identified the need to replace the Hellfire missile. During the mid-2000s, the two services started a new development project called the Joint Air-to-Ground Missile (JAGM), which entered testing in 2012. Both services plan to replace the Hellfire with the JAGM; however, it is unclear when they plan to make the transition. 44 IHS Janes “AGM-114 Hellfire and Longbow Hellfire,” June 21, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3064-jalw. 45 IHS Janes “AGM-114 Hellfire and Longbow Hellfire,” June 21, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3064-jalw. 46 IHS Janes “AGM-114 Hellfire and Longbow Hellfire,” June 21, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3064-jalw. 47 U.S. Air Force, “MQ-1B Predator Fact Sheet,” September 23, 2015, at https://www.af.mil/About-Us/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/104469/mq-1b-predator/. 48 IHS Janes “AGM-114 Hellfire and Longbow Hellfire,” June 21, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3064-jalw. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 14 Figure 11. AGM-114 Hellfire Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lockheed_Martin_Longbow_Hellfire.jpg. Note: This image depicts an “exploded” view, depicting the internal components of the missile. All three military departments procure Hellfire missiles. From 1998 through 2018, DOD procured more than 71,500 missiles at a cost of $7.2 billion.49 Congress appropriated nearly $484 million for approximately 6,000 missiles in FY2019. For FY2020, DOD requested approximately $730 million for 9,000 Hellfire missiles, and it plans to purchase 13,100 missiles at a cost of $1.2 billion between FY2021 and FY2024 (Table 3).50 In its FY2020 recent budget request, DOD states that it is requesting to procure the maximum production of Hellfire missiles.51 Table 3. AGM-114 Hellfire Missile Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP FY2020 FY2021a FY2022b FY2023b FY2024b FY2025b Total Cost ($millions) $726.71 $516.61 $196.74 $233.44 $188.21 $41.82 $1,903.52 Quantity 8,790 8,150 1,795 2,064 1,479 113 22,391 Source: U.S. Army FY2021 Missiles Procurement Line Item 1338C70000 Hellfire Sys Summary; U.S. Air Force FY2021 Missile Procurement Line Item PRDTA2 Predator Hellfire Missile; and U.S. Navy FY2021 Weapons Procurement Line Item 2254 Hellfire. 49 See Department of Defense Budget FY2000-2020 P-1 Procurement budget requests, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Budget-Materials/. 50 U.S. Army FY2020 Missiles Procurement Line Item 1338C70000 Hellfire Sys Summary, at https://apps.dtic.mil/procurement/Y2020/Army/stamped/U_P40_1338C70000_BSA-20_BA-2_APP-2032A_PB_2020.pdf, U.S. Air Force FY2020 Missile Procurement Line Item PRDTA2 Predator Hellfire Missile, at https://apps.dtic.mil/procurement/Y2020/AirForce/stamped/U_P40_PRDTA2_BSA-2_BA-2_APP-3020F_PB_2020.pdf, and U.S. Navy FY2020 Weapons Procurement Line Item 2254 Hellfire, at https://apps.dtic.mil/procurement/Y2020/Navy/stamped/U_P40_2254_BSA-2_BA-2_APP-1507N_PB_2020.pdf. 51 Department of Defense, “FY2020 Program Acquisition Costs by Weapons System,” at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2020/fy2020_Weapons.pdf. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 15 a. Denotes the Administration’s request. b. Denotes programmed funding and quantities. AGM-169 Joint Air-to-Ground Missile (JAGM) The Joint Air-to-Ground Missile is designed to replace the Hellfire, TOW, and Maverick missiles. JAGM uses a new warhead/seeker paired with an existing AGM-114R rocket motor—which is the latest model—to provide improved target acquisition and discrimination (see Figure 12).52 The JAGM has a maximum effective range of 8.6 nautical miles when launched from a helicopter and 15.1 nautical miles when launched from fixed-wing aircraft. JAGM underwent testing starting in 2010, and the missile entered initial operating capability in 2019, having been successfully integrated on the AH-64E Apache and AH-1Z Super Cobra attack helicopters. JAGM is expected to be integrated on other platforms as well, including the FA-18E/F Super Hornet, MQ-1C Grey Eagle, MH-60M Defensive Air Penetrator, MH-60S Seahawk, F-35 Lightning II, and P-8 Poseidon.53 In addition, the Air Force has begun procuring JAGMs but has not announced publicly what platforms will employ the missile. Figure 12. Diagram of an AGM-169 JAGM Source: https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw9220-jalw. Note: The JAGM’s design integrates a new seeker onto the AGM-114R Hellfire II missile body (Lockheed Martin). JAGM entered low-rate initial production in FY2017.54 All three services are procuring JAGM, though the Air Force is requesting only 60 missiles in FY2020, with no projections of additional procurement.55 DOD requested more than $339 million and 1,000 missiles for FY2020, and it projects procuring approximately 4,600 additional missiles through FY2024 for about $1.5 billion (see Table 4). 52 IHS Janes “Joint Air-to-Ground Missile (JAGM),” April 11, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw9220-jalw. 53 IHS Janes “Joint Air-to-Ground Missile (JAGM),” April 11, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw9220-jalw. 54 IHS Janes “Joint Air-to-Ground Missile (JAGM),” April 11, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw9220-jalw. 55 U.S. Air Force FY2020 Missile Procurement Line Item JAGM00 Joint Air-to-Ground Munition, at https://apps.dtic.mil/procurement/Y2020/AirForce/stamped/U_P40_JAGM00_BSA-2_BA-2_APP-3020F_PB_2020.pdf. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 16 Table 4. AGM-169 JAGM Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP FY2020 FY2021a FY2022b FY2023b FY2024b FY2025b Total Cost ($millions) $285.02 $262.78 $215.87 $289.57 $286.32 $285.40 $1,624.96 Quantity 854 860 467 914 838 838 4,771 Source: U.S. Army FY2021 Missiles Procurement Line Item 2605C70302 Joint Air-to-Ground MSLS (JAGM); U.S. Air Force FY2021 Missile Procurement Line Item JAGM00 Joint Air-to-Ground Munition; and U.S. Navy FY2021 Weapons Procurement Line Item 2248 Joint Air Ground Missile (JAGM). a. Denotes the Administration’s request. b. Denotes programmed funding and quantities. AGM-158A/B Joint Air-to-Surface Strike Missile (JASSM) and AGM-158C Long-Range Anti-Ship Missile (LRASM) The Joint Air-to-Surface Strike Missile was conceived in the mid-1990s as a stealthy cruise missile designed to strike targets in heavily defended airspace.56 The JASSM is a 14-foot-long, 2,250-pound missile that can be carried internally on B-1B Lancer and B-52 Stratofortress aircraft and carried externally on a number of tactical fighters, including the F-16 Falcon, F-15E Strike Eagle, F/A-18 Hornet, F/A-18E/F Super Hornet, and F-35 Lightning II (see Figure 13).57 The AGM-158A JASSM has a stated range of more than 200 nautical miles.58 Initial operating capability was declared in 2005 (see Figure 14). AGM-158As have been exported to Australia, Finland, and Poland.59 In 2004, the Air Force decided that it required additional range on the JASSM and developed an extended range version, the AGM-158B JASSM-ER.60 The JASSM-ER uses the same body as the previous version with an improved infrared seeker, a two-way datalink, and enhanced anti-jam GPS receiver.61 The range of the JASSM-ER increased from more than 200 nautical miles to 500 nautical miles.62 This munition reached initial operating capability in 2014 on the B-1B Lancer. It reached full operating capability in 2018 with integration onto the F-15E Strike Eagle, and it is in full-rate production.63 The Air Force originally planned to procure 2,866 JASSMs and JASSM-ERs, but it has since changed the requirement to 7,200 missiles;64as of 2019 the Air Force has 56 U.S. Air Force, “JASSM - The Air Force’s Next Generation Cruise Missile,” press release, March 6, 2008, https://www.afmc.af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/155587/jassm-the-air-forces-next-generation-cruise-missile/. 57 IHS Janes “AGM-158A JASSM and AGM-158B JASSM-ER,” July 23, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3784-jalw. 58 U.S. Air Force, “JASSM - The Air Force’s Next Generation Cruise Missile,” press release, March 6, 2008, https://www.afmc.af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/155587/jassm-the-air-forces-next-generation-cruise-missile/. 59 IHS Janes “AGM-158A JASSM and AGM-158B JASSM-ER,” July 23, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3784-jalw. 60 IHS Janes “AGM-158A JASSM and AGM-158B JASSM-ER,” July 23, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3784-jalw. 61 IHS Janes “AGM-158A JASSM and AGM-158B JASSM-ER,” July 23, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3784-jalw. 62 U.S. Air Force, “JASSM - The Air Force’s Next Generation Cruise Missile,” press release, March 6, 2008, https://www.afmc.af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/155587/jassm-the-air-forces-next-generation-cruise-missile/. 63 IHS Janes “AGM-158A JASSM and AGM-158B JASSM-ER,” July 23, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3784-jalw. 64 Department of Defense, “Comprehensive Selected Acquisition Reports for the Annual 2018 Reporting Requirements Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 17 procured more than 4,000 JASSMs. Japan has expressed interest in procuring JASSM-ERs, and Poland was approved to receive 70 missiles in 2016.65 The Air Force announced plans in September 2019 to increase JASSM production to a maximum rate of 550 missiles per year.66 The Service intends to grow the total JASSM inventory to approximately 10,000 missiles. In February 2020, the Air Force announced an $818 million contract to produce the latest version of the JASSM-Extreme Range Missile. According to Inside Defense, this new contract will produce 790 JASSM-ER missiles over two production lots.67 The new production contract includes 40 JASSM missiles to support foreign military sales; however, it is unclear which country will receive these missiles. The Long Range Anti-Ship Missile (LRASM) was conceived by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) as a concept to use a JASSM body to replace the AGM-88 Harpoon.68 Flight testing for LRASM began in 2012 on board a B-1B, and the missile was tested on an F/A-18E/F Super Hornet. LRASM uses a combination of passive radio-frequency sensors, and electro-optical/infrared seekers for terminal guidance.69 Japan has expressed interest in procuring the LRASM. In September 2019, the Air Force announced its intent to procure up to 410 LRASM missiles, changing its plan from an original estimate of 110 missiles.70 as Updated by the President’s Fiscal Year 2020 Budget,” press release, August 1, 2019, https://media.defense.gov/2019/Aug/01/2002165676/-1/-1/1/DEPARTMENT-OF-DEFENSE-SELECTED-ACQUISITION-REPORTS-(SARS)-DECEMBER-2018.PDF. 65 IHS Janes “AGM-158A JASSM and AGM-158B JASSM-ER,” July 23, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3784-jalw. 66 Sara Sirota, “Air Force reveals plans to grow stockpile of JASSM, LRASM missiles,” Inside Defense, September 27, 2019, https://insidedefense.com/daily-news/air-force-reveals-plans-grow-stockpile-jassm-lrasm-missiles. 67 Sara Sirota, “Air Force, Lockheed Martin finalize $818 million JASSM-ER contract,” Inside Defense, April 1, 2020, https://insidedefense.com/insider/air-force-lockheed-martin-finalize-818-million-jassm-er-contract. 68 IHS Janes “AGM-158C Long-Range Anti-Ship Missile (LRASM),” July 8, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalwa137-jalw. 69 IHS Janes “AGM-158C Long-Range Anti-Ship Missile (LRASM),” July 8, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalwa137-jalw. 70 Sara Sirota, “Air Force reveals plans to grow stockpile of JASSM, LRASM missiles,” Inside Defense, September 27, 2019, https://insidedefense.com/daily-news/air-force-reveals-plans-grow-stockpile-jassm-lrasm-missiles. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 18 Figure 13. AGM-158 Attached to an F/A-18D Hornet Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:F-18D_Hornet_(HN-466)Tour_de_Sky_2014-08-09_06_JDAM_AGM-154.JPG. Note: JDAM precision bomb and AGM-154C Joint Standoff Weapon glide bomb under the left wing of Finnish air force F-18D Hornet fighter (HN-466) on ground display at Oulu Airport at Tour de Sky 2014 air show. Figure 14. JASSM in Flight Source: https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3784-jalw. Note: A JASSM hit its target during 2009 Lot 7 reliability trials (Lockheed Martin). Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 19 The JASSM-ER and the LRASM are produced in the same facility.71 According to budget documents, DOD states that JASSM and LRASM procurement in FY2020 is at maximum production rate. The Air Force and Navy are procuring JASSM-ER and LRASM as of 2019. In FY2020, DOD requested to procure 430 JASSM-ER missiles and an additional 48 LRASMs (see Table 5). In September 2019, the Air Force announced plans to increased JASSM production to 500 missiles per year, with additional capacity to up produce 96 LRASMs.72 DOD projects reduced procurement quantities of JASSM-ER, while maintaining procurement quantities of LRASM through FY2024. Table 5. JASSM and LRASM Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP FY2020 FY2021a FY2022b FY2023b FY2024b FY2025b Total JASSM Cost ($millions) $483.43 $505.95 $750.65 $758.29 $758.40 $761.89 $4,018.60 JASSM Quantity 390 400 512 516 520 509 2,847 LRASM Cost ($millions) $72.54 $188.65 $164.85 $329.50 $343.45 $161.37 $1,260.35 LRASM Quantity 17 53 48 92 100 46 356 Source: U.S. Air Force FY2021 Missile Procurement Line Item JASM0 Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile; U.S. Air Force FY2021 Missile Procurement Line Item LRASM0 LRASM0; and U.S. Navy FY2021 Weapons Procurement Line Item 2291 LRASM. a. Denotes the Administration’s request. b. Denotes programmed funding and quantities. AGM-88E Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile (AARGM) The Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile is designed to target enemy integrated air defenses, specifically guidance radars (see Figure 15). AARGM was conceived in 2001 to replace the High-Speed Anti-Radiation Missile (HARM). DOD identified several deficiencies in the HARM that limited its operational effectiveness during Operation Iraqi Freedom.73 Thus, AARGM incorporated a new solid-propellant rocket motor that improved its range over the HARM, along with new guidance and seeker systems—using GPS inertial navigation for guidance and millimeter wave and W-band (higher than 40 GHz) sensors.74 AARGM entered operational testing in 2010 and initial operational capability in 2012. AARGM has been integrated on the F/A-18C/D Hornet, F/A-18E/F Super Hornet, E/A-18G Growler, F-16C/D Falcon, and the F-35 Lightning II. 71 Department of Defense, “FY2020 Program Acquisition Costs by Weapons System,” at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2020/fy2020_Weapons.pdf. 72 Sara Sirota, “Air Force reveals plans to grow stockpile of JASSM, LRASM missiles,” Inside Defense, September 27, 2019, at https://insidedefense.com/daily-news/air-force-reveals-plans-grow-stockpile-jassm-lrasm-missiles. 73 IHS Janes “AGM-88E Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile (AARGM),” July 31, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3723-jalw. 74 IHS Janes “AGM-88E Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile (AARGM),” July 31, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3723-jalw. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 20 Figure 15. Model of an AGM-88E ARRGM Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:AGM-88E_AARGM_mockup.jpg. Both the Navy and the Air Force have procured the AARGM or its predecessor the HARM; however, neither service is procuring additional missiles as of FY2020.75 The Navy, however, has requested $183 million of procurement appropriations to modify its current stockpile of AARGMs. The Air Force has not requested appropriations to modify its stockpile of HARMs since FY2016.76 Table 6 describes the total DOD request for AARGM. AARGM has been exported to a number of countries, including Australia, Italy, Finland, Germany, and Poland.77 Table 6. ARRGM Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP FY2020 FY2021a FY2022b FY2023b FY2024b FY2025b Total Cost ($millions) $183.74 $147.57 $128.22 $198.92 $237.40 $270.72 $1,166.56 AARGM Quantity — 24 32 70 109 140 375 Source: U.S. Navy FY2021 Weapons Procurement Line Item 2327 HARM Mods. a. Denotes the Administration’s request. b. Denotes programmed funding and quantities. 75 Department of Defense, Program Acquisition Cost by Weapon System, Washington, DC, March 2019, p. 5-3, https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2020/fy2020_Weapons.pdf. 76 See Department of Defense Budget FY2018 P-1 Procurement budget requests, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Budget-Materials/. 77 IHS Janes “AGM-88E Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile (AARGM),” July 31, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jalw3723-jalw. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 21 Ground-Launched Guided Munitions Guided Multiple Launch Rocket System (GMLRS) GMLRS (see Figure 16) is a GPS-guided 227-millimeter rocket that was jointly developed by the United States, France, Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom.78 Development began in 1999, and the U.S. military began procuring GMLRS in FY2003. GMLRS is capable of being launched from the M270 multiple launch rocket system (MLRS) and the M142 High Mobility Artillery Rocket System (HIMARS). GMLRS has a 200-pound unitary warhead and a maximum range of 70 kilometers.79 Both the Army and the Marine Corps have procured GMLRS. Since 1998, DOD has spent nearly $5.4 billion to procure more than 42,000 rockets.80 DOD has requested more than $1.2 billion for approximately 9,900 rockets in FY2020, and it plans to spend an additional $4.3 billion for nearly 29,000 GMLRS between FY2021 and FY2024. In addition, GMLRS is being exported: Bahrain, United Arab Emirates, Poland, and Romania are procuring GMLRS, as are the development partners (France, Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom).81 See Table 7 for an overview of the current DOD request for GMLRS. Figure 16. GMLRS Launching Source: https://www.lockheedmartin.com/en-us/products/guided-mlrs-unitary-rocket.html. 78 IHS Janes “227 mm MLRS/GMLRS rockets,” April 3, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jah_1074-jah_. 79 IHS Janes “227 mm MLRS/GMLRS rockets,” April 3, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jah_1074-jah_. 80 See Department of Defense Budget FY2000-2020 P-1 Procurement budget requests, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Budget-Materials/. 81 IHS Janes “227 mm MLRS/GMLRS rockets,” April 3, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jah_1074-jah_. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 22 Table 7. GMLRS Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP FY2020 FY2021a FY2022b FY2023b FY2024b FY2025b Total Cost ($millions) $1,221.17 $1,128.32 $869.60 $1,092.94 $1,100.36 $1,082.83 $6,495.21 Quantity 8,523 7,360 5,876 7,267 6,957 6,592 42,575 Source: U.S. Army FY2021 Missile Procurement Line Item 6005C64400 Guided MLRS Rocket (GMLRS) and U.S. Navy FY2021 Procurement, Marine Corps Line Item 3025 Guided MLRS Rocket (GMLRS). a. Denotes the Administration’s request. b. Denotes programmed funding and quantities. Army Tactical Missile System (ATACMS) ATACMS (see Figure 17) is a 610-millimeter rocket that can be launched from either the M270 MLRS (two rockets) or the M142 HIMARS (a single rocket). This rocket was originally developed in the 1980s and was later updated to provide GPS guidance.82 ATAMCS underwent a second upgrade in 1991, which allowed ATACMS warheads to seek and attack armored targets.83 Other upgrades have improved target discrimination and new penetrating warheads for hardened targets. In 2016, then-Secretary of Defense Ash Carter announced that the Strategic Capabilities Office had developed a new seeker that allowed the ATACMS rocket to target ships.84 The Army has stated that it intends to retire the ATACMS and replace it with the new Precision Strike Missile. Figure 17. ATACMS Long-Range Precision Tactical Missile System Source: https://www.lockheedmartin.com/content/dam/lockheed-martin/mfc/pc/army-tacticle-missile-system-block-ia-unitary-atacms/mfc-atacms-block-1a-unitary-pc.pdf. 82 IHS Janes “610 mm Army Tactical Missile System rockets,” June 28, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jah_1090-jah_. 83 IHS Janes “610 mm Army Tactical Missile System rockets,” June 28, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jah_1090-jah_. 84 Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “Carter, Roper Unveil Army’s New Ship-Killer Missile: ATACMS Upgrade,” Breaking Defense, October 28, 2016, at https://breakingdefense.com/2016/10/army-atacms-missile-will-kill-ships-secdef-carter/. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 23 The Army is procuring ATACMS in FY2020, though this procurement will curtail as the Precision Strike Missile enters service. DOD requested to procure 240 missiles for $340 million in FY2020;85 it plans to procure 492 missiles for $611 million between FY2021 and FY2024. Table 8 provides an overview of the most recent request for ATACMS. Five hundred and six ATACMS have been exported to a number of countries, including the United Arab Emirates and Romania.86 Table 8. ATACMS Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP FY2020 FY2021a FY2022b FY2023b FY2024b FY2025b Total Cost ($millions) $300.78 $- $- $- $- $- $300.78 Quantity 232 — — — — — 232 Source: U.S. Army FY2021 Missile Procurement Line Item 6472C98510 ARMY TACTICAL MSL SYS (ATACMS) – SYS SUS. a. Denotes the Administration’s request. b. Denotes programmed funding and quantities. Precision Strike Missile (PrSM) The PrSM is a new development program intended to replace ATACMS. PrSM is designed to be launched from the M270 and the M142 HIMARS multiple rocket launcher system. The Army states that PrSM is designed to launch two missiles in a launcher pod compared to ATACMS single missile, has a range in excess of 400 kilometers, and has an anti-jam GPS antenna.87 PrSM is in development and is planned to enter early operational service in FY2023. The Army has not stated when it intends to begin testing the PrSM. The Army states that although this missile might be sold to foreign militaries in the future, there are no purchase commitments from foreign governments as of 2019. The Army tested the PrSM at White Sands, NM, in its first flight test in December 2019.88 In its second test in March 2019, the Army successfully tested the PrSMs short-range capabilities. 85 U.S. Army Missile Procurement Line Item 6472C98510 ARMY TACTICAL MSL SYS (ATACMS) – SYS SUS, at https://apps.dtic.mil/procurement/Y2020/Army/stamped/U_P40_6472C98510_BSA-30_BA-2_APP-2032A_PB_2020.pdf 86 IHS Janes “610 mm Army Tactical Missile System rockets,” June 28, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jah_1090-jah_. 87 U.S. Army Acquisition Support Center “Precision Strike Missile Fact Sheet,” at https://asc.army.mil/web/portfolio-item/ms-prsm/. 88 Sydney Freedberg Jr., “PRSM: Lockheed Long-Range Missile Passes Short-Range Stress Test,” Breaking Defense, March 19, 2020, https://breakingdefense.com/2020/03/lockheed-long-range-missile-passes-short-range-stress-test/. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 24 Figure 18. Notional Design of PrSM Source: https://www.janes.com/article/83990/us-army-s-precision-strike-missile-moves-ahead-as-us-russia-inf-treaty-falters. Table 9. PrSM Requested and Programmed Procurement FY2020 FY2021a FY2022b FY2023b FY2024b FY2025b Total Cost ($millions) $49.94 $168.42 $210.06 $335.09 $309.91 $49.94 $1,073.41 Quantity — 30 110 178 350 350 1,018 Source: U.S. Army FY2021 Missile Procurement Line Item 8540C29600 PRECISION STRIKE MISSILE (PRSM). a. Denotes the Administration’s request. b. Denotes programmed funding and quantities. Naval Precision-Guided Munitions Tomahawk Cruise Missile The Tomahawk cruise missile was originally developed during the early- to mid-1970s. It was designed to be launched by submarines and from surface combatants. Designed to fly at 570 miles per hour (Mach 0.74, or 74% of the speed of sound) for up to 870 nautical miles,89 the Tomahawk has received a number of upgrades since it entered service. The Tomahawk Block IV is the current cruise missile in production and comes in two versions—one for surface ships and another for submarines (see Figure 19). Upgrades have included improvements to GPS guidance, satellite datalink communications, and propulsion.90 The first operational use of the Tomahawk 89 IHS Janes “Tomahawk/RGM/UGM-109A/B/C/D/E,” September 2, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jnws0162-jnw_. 90 IHS Janes “Tomahawk/RGM/UGM-109A/B/C/D/E,” September 2, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 25 was during Operation Desert Storm, where the Navy launched 290 missiles from 12 submarines. Since then, IHS Janes reports that the Navy has used more than 1,600 missiles in Iraq, Bosnia, Serbia, Afghanistan, and Syria.91 The United Kingdom is the only export customer of the Tomahawk Block IV. Figure 19. Tomahawk Block IV Cruise Missile Source: https://www.navy.mil/management/photodb/photos/021110-N-0000X-003.jpg. Notes: “A Tactical ‘Tomahawk’ Block IV cruise missile conducts a controlled flight test over the Naval Air Systems Command western test range complex in southern California. During the second such test flight, the missile successfully completed a vertical underwater launch, flew a fully guided 780-mile course, and impacted a designated target structure as planned.” (U.S. Navy photo.) From FY1998 through FY2018, the Navy spent $5.87 billion on 4,984 Tomahawk cruise missiles.92 The Navy has requested nearly $387 million for 90 missiles in FY2020, and it projects to procure an additional 90 missiles for nearly $374 million in FY2021, with no plans to procure additional missiles in FY2022-FY2024.93 The Navy projects requesting $819 million for additional procurement appropriations.94 (See Table 10 for the most recent Tomahawk request.) jnws0162-jnw_. 91 IHS Janes “Tomahawk/RGM/UGM-109A/B/C/D/E,” September 2, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jnws0162-jnw_. 92 See Department of Defense Budget FY2000-2020 P-1 Procurement budget requests, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Budget-Materials/. 93 U.S. Navy FY2020 Weapons Procurement Line Item 2101 Tomahawk, at https://apps.dtic.mil/procurement/Y2020/Navy/stamped/U_P40_2101_BSA-1_BA-2_APP-1507N_PB_2020.pdf. 94 U.S. Navy FY2020 Weapons Procurement Line Item 2101 Tomahawk, at https://apps.dtic.mil/procurement/Y2020/Navy/stamped/U_P40_2101_BSA-1_BA-2_APP-1507N_PB_2020.pdf. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 26 Table 10. Tomahawk Missile Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP FY2020 FY2021a FY2022b FY2023b FY2024b FY2025b Total Cost ($millions) $386.16 $277.69 $5.03 $5.02 $5.06 $5.36 $684.33 Quantity 90 155 — — — — 245 Source: U.S. Navy FY2021 Weapons Procurement Line Item 2101 Tomahawk. a. Denotes the Administration’s request. b. Denotes programmed funding and quantities. Standard Missile-6 (SM-6) The Standard Missile-6 was originally designed in 2004 as an anti-aircraft missile, derived from the Navy’s SM-2 Block IV (see Figure 20).95 Since its development, the SM-6 has been integrated into the Navy’s Naval Integrated Fires-Counter Air (NIF-CA) program to strike enemy surface ships. The missile was designed to receive targeting information from AEGIS radars and has been upgraded to receive target information from the E-2D Advanced Hawkeye. In addition to anti-air and anti-surface missions, the SM-6 is also capable of performing anti-ballistic missile missions.96 SM-6 entered low-rate initial production in FY2009 and full rate production in FY2013.97 The SM-6 is funded under the Navy’s procurement line item 2234 Standard Missile.98 According to the latest Selected Acquisition Reports, DOD increased the requirement for SM-6 missiles from 1,800 to 2,331.99 DOD requested $488 million for 125 missiles in FY2020; it is projected that DOD will procure an additional 615 missiles between FY2021 and FY2024 at a cost of nearly $2.9 billion.100 Table 11 provides an overview of the current DOD request for SM-6 missiles. Table 11. SM-6 Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP FY2020 FY2021a FY2022b FY2023b FY2024b FY2025b Total Cost ($millions) $488.31 $539.83 $625.14 $600.76 $905.19 $840.14 $3,999.37 Quantity 125 125 132 135 200 183 900 Source: U.S. Navy FY2021 Weapons Procurement Line Item 2234 Standard Missile. 95 IHS Janes “Stand Missile-6 (SM-6)/Extended Range Active Missile ERAM),” April 3, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jnw_0076-jnw_. 96 Raytheon, “One missile, many missions: SM-6 Missile Gives Surface Forces More Power in More Places,” press release, January 9, 2019, https://www.raytheon.com/news/feature/sm-6_anti-surface_warfare. 97 U.S. Navy FY2014 Weapons Procurement Line Item 2234 Standard Missile, at https://apps.dtic.mil/procurement/Y2014/Navy/stamped/P40_2234_BSA-2_BA-2_APP-1507N_PB_2014.pdf. 98 U.S. Navy FY2020 Weapons Procurement Line Item 2234 Standard Missile, at https://apps.dtic.mil/procurement/Y2020/Navy/stamped/U_P40_2234_BSA-2_BA-2_APP-1507N_PB_2020.pdf. 99 Department of Defense, “Comprehensive Selected Acquisition Reports for the Annual 2018 Reporting Requirements as Updated by the President’s Fiscal Year 2020 Budget,” press release, August 1, 2019, https://media.defense.gov/2019/Aug/01/2002165676/-1/-1/1/DEPARTMENT-OF-DEFENSE-SELECTED-ACQUISITION-REPORTS-(SARS)-DECEMBER-2018.PDF. 100 U.S. Navy FY2020 Weapons Procurement Line Item 2234 Standard Missile, at https://apps.dtic.mil/procurement/Y2020/Navy/stamped/U_P40_2234_BSA-2_BA-2_APP-1507N_PB_2020.pdf. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 27 a. Denotes the Administration’s request. b. Denotes programmed funding and quantities. Figure 20. SM-6 Launching from a Ship Source: https://www.raytheon.com/news/feature/sm-6_anti-surface_warfare. Naval Strike Missile (NSM) The Naval Strike Missile was originally developed by the Norwegian company Kongsberg as a replacement for the Penguin anti-ship missile (see Figure 21 and Figure 22).101 This missile is an anti-ship, low-observable cruise missile capable of flying close the surface of the ocean to avoid radar detection. IHS Janes states that “[t]he NSM airframe materials and missile shape are intended to minimise its infrared (IR) and radar signatures and radar cross section.”102 The NSM is designed to fly multiple flight profiles—different altitudes and speeds—with effective ranges of between 100 and 300 nautical miles at a cruise speed of up to 0.9 Mach. The Navy has integrated the NSM on its Littoral Combat Ship, which deployed into the Pacific region in September 2019.103 The Navy began procuring the NSM in FY2019 under the Littoral Combat Ship Over-the-Horizon Missile procurement line (see Table 12). The Navy has requested $38 million for 18 missiles, and it plans to spend approximately $166 million for an additional 83 missile through 101 IHS Janes “Naval Strike Missile (NSM),” May, 21, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jnws0911-jnw_. 102 IHS Janes “Naval Strike Missile (NSM),” May, 21, 2019, at https://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/jnws0911-jnw_. 103 David B. Larter, “US Navy deploys new ship-killer missile to China’s backyard,” Defense News, September 5, 2019, at https://www.defensenews.com/naval/2019/09/06/the-us-navy-just-deployed-its-new-ship-killer-missile-to-chinas-backyard/. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 28 FY2024. According to its budget justification, the Navy does not have a specific requirement for the number of missiles it plans to procure.104 Figure 21. Naval Strike Missile in Flight Source: https://www.kongsberg.com/news-and-media/news-archive/2019/raytheon-providing-us-marines-with-naval-strike-missile/. Figure 22. Illustration of Naval Strike Missile with Attributes Source: https://www.quora.com/Is-it-possible-to-have-a-stealthy-hypersonic-scramjet-or-does-the-geometry-of-the-air-intake-have-a-high-radar-cross-section. 104 U.S. Navy FY2020 Weapons Procurement Line Item 2292 LCS OTH Missile, at https://apps.dtic.mil/procurement/Y2020/Navy/stamped/U_P40_2292_BSA-2_BA-2_APP-1507N_PB_2020.pdf. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 29 Table 12. Naval Strike Missile Requested and Programmed Procurement in the FYDP FY2020 FY2021a FY2022b FY2023b FY2024b FY2025b Total Cost ($millions) $38.14 $32.91 $60.12 $74.30 $80.77 $79.78 $366.01 Quantity 18 15 34 44 48 48 207 Source: U.S. Navy FY2021 Weapons Procurement Line Item 2292 LCS OTH Missile. a. Denotes the Administration’s request. b. Denotes programmed funding and quantities. Potential Issues for Congress  Planned procurement quantities and stockpile assessment. One potential issue for Congress is whether DOD’s desired quantities of standoff munitions are appropriate. Current operations have demonstrated a large demand for all types of PGMs. A potential high-intensity conflict would potentially require large stockpiles of all types of weapons.105 Several of these types of munitions—particularly JASSM, LRASM, and AARGM—are being procured in relatively small quantities, given their potential use rates in a high-intensity conflict scenario, along with the time it would take for replacement spent munitions once initial inventories are exhausted. A related issue is whether DOD has adequately assessed the sufficiency of existing and planned PGM stockpiles, particularly in light of recent use rates for such weapons. Congress has from time to time required DOD to assess munitions requirements, as well as to report on combatant command munitions requirements. More recently, Congress required DOD to provide an annual report on the munitions inventory, along with an unconstrained assessment of munitions requirements.106  Defense industrial base production capacity. Another potential issue for Congress concerns the defense industrial base’s capacity for building PGMs, particularly for meeting increased demands for such weapons during an extended-duration, high-intensity conflict. The question is part of a larger issue of whether various parts of the U.S. defense industrial base are adequate, in an era of renewed great power competition, to meet potential wartime mobilization demands.107  Supply chain security. Another potential issue for Congress concerns supply chain security, meaning whether U.S. PGMs incorporate components, materials, or software of foreign origin. Supply chain security could affect wartime reliability of these weapons as well as the ability of the U.S. industrial base to 105 Gary Roughead, Eric Edelman, et al., Providing for the Common Defense, National Defense Strategy Commission, The Assessment and Recommendations of the National Defense Strategy Commission, 2018, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/2018-11/providing-for-the-common-defense.pdf. 106 See P.L. 115-232 §1061 and §1067. 107 For more information, see CRS Report R43838, Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 30 build replacement PGMs in a timely manner during an extended-duration, high-intensity conflict.  Development timelines. Congress may be concerned about the development timeline of PGMs compared with development timelines of adversary A2/AD capabilities. China and Russia have developed sophisticated systems over the past 10 years, while DOD has developed relatively few systems. Some analysts argue that these systems can exceed DOD munitions capabilities (such as range and speed).108 Can and, if so, should DOD develop new systems and at a pace that can match or exceed that of Chinese or Russian weapons systems?  Affordability and cost-effectiveness. Congress may also be concerned about the affordability of DOD’s plans for procuring various PGMs in large numbers, and the cost-effectiveness of PGMs relative to other potential means of accomplishing certain DOD missions, particularly in a context of finite DOD resources and competing DOD program priorities. Another aspect of cost-effectiveness concerns the cost of the weapon compared to the cost of a target. For instance, in 2017 a U.S. ally used a $3 million Patriot missile to engage a $300 quadcopter drone.109  Emerging factors that may affect PGM programs. Another potential issue for Congress is how DOD’s programs for developing and procuring PGMs might be affected by emerging factors such as  the U.S. withdrawal from the Intermediate Nuclear Force (INF) treaty;110  new U.S. military operational concepts for countering Chinese A2/AD forces in the Indo-Pacific region, such as the Army’s new Multi-Domain Operations (MDO) operational concept and the Marine Corps’ new Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations (EABO) concept, both of which possibly feature the potential use of such weapons from island locations in the Pacific as a way of countering China’s A2/AD forces; and  emerging technologies such as hypersonics and artificial intelligence (AI).111 108 Gary Roughead, Eric Edelman, et al., Providing for the Common Defense, National Defense Strategy Commission, The Assessment and Recommendations of the National Defense Strategy Commission, 2018, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/2018-11/providing-for-the-common-defense.pdf. 109 Chris Baraniuk, “Small drone ‘shot with Patriot missile,’” BBC, March 15, 2017, at https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-39277940. 110 For more information on the INF treaty and its implications for U.S. policy, see CRS Report R43832, Russian Compliance with the Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty: Background and Issues for Congress, by Amy F. Woolf. 111 For more information on each of these technologies, see CRS Report R45811, Hypersonic Weapons: Background and Issues for Congress, by Kelley M. Sayler, and CRS Report R45178, Artificial Intelligence and National Security, by Kelley M. Sayler. CRS-31 Appendix A. Prior Year Procurement by Service Table A-1. PGM Procurement Cost and Quantities, by Service (FY1998-FY2009) Service FY1998 FY1999 FY2000 FY2001 FY2002 FY2003 FY2004 FY2005 FY2006 FY2007 FY2008 FY2009 Army Nominal Cost ($m) $330.40 $398.90 $384.70 $377.80 $273.30 $449.20 $189.30 $377.80 $304.70 $201.30 $601.08 $562.33 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $489.34 $582.93 $554.16 $535.58 $380.80 $612.57 $251.80 $490.33 $386.28 $250.22 $735.72 $678.65 Quantity 1,209 2,096 2,310 2,300 2,224 978 846 1,110 1,082 943 5,004 5,597 Air Force Nominal Cost ($m) $48.60 $79.50 $189.20 $203.70 $343.70 $543.70 $540.00 $717.00 $413.40 $609.40 $438.81 $551.44 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $71.98 $116.18 $272.54 $288.77 $478.89 $741.44 $718.28 $930.56 $524.09 $757.49 $537.09 $665.51 Quantity 1,655 3,778 8,436 8,904 14,468 23,577 20,584 23,633 9,248 11,301 6,588 10,048 Navy Nominal Cost ($m) $71.20 $538.60 $148.20 $182.10 $405.40 $798.80 $674.20 $491.10 $547.70 $600.70 $606.56 $447.86 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $105.45 $787.08 $213.48 $258.15 $564.86 $1,089.32 $896.78 $637.38 $694.35 $746.67 $742.42 $540.50 Quantity 547 1,475 2,153 2,625 14,608 12,750 12,893 7,928 4,830 4,790 2,899 1,752 Source: Department of Defense Budget FY2000-2020 P-1 Procurement budget requests, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Budget-Materials/, Department of Defense National Defense Budget Estimate for FY2020 pp. 58-59, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2020/FY20_Green_Book.pdf, Air Force FY2020 Missile procurement budget justifications; Army FY2020 Missile procurement budget justifications; Navy FY2020 Weapons procurement budget justifications. CRS-32 Table A-2. PGM Procurement Cost and Quantities, by Service (FY2010-FY2020) Service FY2010 FY2011 FY2012 FY2013 FY2014 FY2015 FY2016 FY2017 FY2018 FY2019 FY2020* Total Army Nominal Cost ($m) $580.41 $486.71 $442.13 $240.23 $382.52 $163.73 $365.12 $968.50 $1,639.33 $1,425.64 $2,232.32 $13,377.47 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $689.49 $568.78 $508.90 $272.68 $428.06 $180.46 $395.37 $1,028.14 $1,705.51 $1,454.14 $2,232.32 $15,412.24 Quantity 5,393 4,065 4,101 1,741 2,511 1,030 2,249 8,211 12,660 10,848 15,531 94,039 Air Force Nominal Cost ($m) $471.19 $748.58 $484.97 $433.86 $587.13 $968.54 $1,792.59 $1,611.86 $2,243.54 $2,178.85 $2,372.15 $18,571.71 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $559.74 $874.82 $558.21 $492.47 $657.04 $1,067.50 $1,941.08 $1,711.11 $2,334.11 $2,222.41 $2,372.15 $20,893.44 Quantity 11,386 16,955 5,440 5,194 11,226 12,612 32,568 35,701 48,111 46,363 49,602 417,378 Navy Nominal Cost ($m) $435.01 $1,022.50 $767.75 $796.26 $729.05 $828.41 $740.36 $1,053.63 $1,167.53 $1,084.67 $1,541.60 $15,679.18 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $516.77 $1,194.93 $883.69 $903.81 $815.86 $913.05 $801.69 $1,118.51 $1,214.66 $1,106.35 $1,541.60 $18,287.35 Quantity 1,573 1,087 783 1,184 497 343 250 534 8,217 4,696 5,152 93,566 Source: Department of Defense Budget FY2000-2020 P-1 Procurement budget requests, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Budget-Materials/, Department of Defense National Defense Budget Estimate for FY2020 pp. 58-59, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2020/FY20_Green_Book.pdf, Air Force FY2020 Missile procurement budget justifications; Army FY2020 Missile procurement budget justifications; Navy FY2020 Weapons procurement budget justifications. CRS-33 Appendix B. Prior Year Procurement by Program Table B-1. PGM Procurement Cost and Quantities, by Program (FY1998-FY2009) Program FY1998 FY1999 FY2000 FY2001 FY2002 FY2003 FY2004 FY2005 FY2006 FY2007 FY2008 FY2009 ARRGM Nominal Cost ($m) $- $- $- $89.10 $4.90 $3.90 $- $- $- $- $- $41.02 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $- $- $- $126.31 $6.83 $5.32 $- $- $- $- $- $49.51 Quantity - - - 270 - - - - - - - - ATACMS Nominal Cost ($m) $89.80 $90.60 $90.80 $95.10 $35.00 $137.50 $57.60 $160.80 $104.10 $76.30 $84.78 $- Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $133.00 $132.40 $130.80 $134.82 $48.77 $187.51 $76.62 $208.70 $131.97 $94.84 $103.77 $- Quantity 109 96 110 100 24 156 60 156 98 18 84 - GMLRS Nominal Cost ($m) $- $- $- $- $- $130.50 $106.80 $111.30 $121.60 $125.00 $263.71 $309.21 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $- $- $- $- $- $177.96 $142.06 $144.45 $154.16 $155.38 $322.78 $373.17 Quantity - - - - - 822 786 954 984 925 2,070 2,652 Hellfire Nominal Cost ($m) $260.40 $308.30 $313.80 $282.70 $238.30 $191.10 $46.10 $202.80 $210.10 $244.50 $387.89 $483.52 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $385.66 $450.53 $452.03 $400.77 $332.03 $260.60 $61.32 $263.21 $266.35 $303.92 $474.78 $583.54 Quantity 1,100 2,000 2,425 2,200 2,200 137 172 1,020 1,423 2,958 4,611 5,584 JAGM Nominal Cost ($m) $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- Quantity - - - - - - - - - - - - JASSM Nominal Cost ($m) $- $- $- $0.20 $42.70 $53.80 $100.90 $139.20 $98.70 $156.50 $160.04 $139.70 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $- $- $- $0.28 $59.50 $73.37 $134.21 $180.66 $125.13 $194.53 $195.88 $168.60 CRS-34 Program FY1998 FY1999 FY2000 FY2001 FY2002 FY2003 FY2004 FY2005 FY2006 FY2007 FY2008 FY2009 Quantity - - - - 76 100 240 288 75 163 111 100 JDAM Nominal Cost ($m) $64.30 $117.30 $270.40 $272.70 $602.80 $752.30 $689.40 $665.50 $306.10 $280.70 $167.10 $175.09 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $95.23 $171.42 $389.51 $386.59 $839.91 $1,025.91 $917.00 $863.72 $388.06 $348.91 $204.53 $211.30 Quantity 2,202 4,523 10,300 11,229 28,945 35,620 32,666 29,756 11,605 10,585 5,724 6,242 LRASM Nominal Cost ($m) $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- Quantity - - - - - - - - - - - - SDB Nominal Cost ($m) $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $29.10 $52.20 $114.70 $94.65 $132.82 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $37.77 $66.18 $142.57 $115.85 $160.29 Quantity - - - - - - - 199 567 2,030 1,395 2,612 SDB II Nominal Cost ($m) $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- Quantity - - - - - - - - - - - - SM-6 Nominal Cost ($m) $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- Quantity - - - - - - - - - - - - Tomahawk Nominal Cost ($m) $26.30 $439.20 $- $- $73.00 $437.10 $352.00 $277.20 $373.00 $353.00 $475.83 $280.27 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $38.95 $641.82 $- $- $101.71 $596.07 $468.21 $359.77 $472.87 $438.78 $582.41 $338.24 Quantity - 624 - - 25 350 322 298 408 355 496 207 CRS-35 Source: Department of Defense Budget FY2000-2020 P-1 Procurement budget requests, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Budget-Materials/, Department of Defense National Defense Budget Estimate for FY2020 pp. 58-59, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2020/FY20_Green_Book.pdf, Air Force FY2020 Missile procurement budget justifications; Army FY2020 Missile procurement budget justifications; Navy FY2020 Weapons procurement budget justifications. CRS-36 Table B-2. PGM Procurement Cost and Quantities, by Program (FY2010-FY2020) Program FY2010 FY2011 FY2012 FY2013 FY2014 FY2015 FY2016 FY2017 FY2018 FY2019 FY2020* Grand Total ARRGM Nominal Cost ($m) $47.83 $51.91 $76.56 $83.89 $94.06 $106.49 $120.80 $180.05 $183.37 $179.89 $183.74 $1,447.49 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $56.81 $60.66 $88.12 $95.22 $105.26 $117.37 $130.80 $191.14 $190.77 $183.48 $183.74 $1,591.34 Quantity 33 44 72 - - - - - - - - 419 ATACMS Nominal Cost ($m) $- $- $- $- $35.60 $- $- $- $340.61 $1,398.59 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $- $- $- $- $39.84 $- $- $- $- $- $340.61 $1,763.63 Quantity - - - - 24 - - - 240 1,275 GMLRS Nominal Cost ($m) $353.31 $264.55 $333.17 $214.29 $273.03 $127.15 $251.06 $408.84 $1,027.97 $975.51 $1,274.79 $6,671.77 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $419.71 $309.16 $383.48 $243.23 $305.53 $140.14 $271.86 $434.01 $1,069.46 $995.01 $1,274.79 $7,316.34 Quantity 3,228 2,592 3,194 1,608 2,166 768 1,866 3,360 6,528 7,818 9,910 52,231 Hellfire Nominal Cost ($m) $422.45 $439.99 $221.42 $146.08 $166.17 $395.94 $784.04 $681.68 $821.05 $483.97 $730.71 $8,463.01 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $501.84 $514.19 $254.86 $165.81 $185.95 $436.39 $848.99 $723.65 $854.19 $493.64 $730.71 $9,944.97 Quantity 4,684 2,970 2,162 1,315 1,143 3,405 6,639 6,797 10,501 6,066 9,000 80,512 JAGM Nominal Cost ($m) $- $- $- $- $- $- $27.74 $83.83 $182.22 $280.57 $339.32 $913.68 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $- $- $- $- $- $- $30.04 $88.99 $189.58 $286.18 $339.32 $934.11 Quantity - - - - - - - 469 899 796 1,051 3,215 JASSM Nominal Cost ($m) $52.52 $168.23 $236.19 $230.19 $271.15 $329.16 $425.58 $431.65 $433.12 $602.83 $503.43 $4,575.77 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $62.38 $196.60 $271.86 $261.28 $303.44 $362.79 $460.83 $458.22 $450.60 $614.88 $503.43 $5,078.47 Quantity - 171 202 233 187 240 340 360 360 360 430 4,036 CRS-37 Program FY2010 FY2011 FY2012 FY2013 FY2014 FY2015 FY2016 FY2017 FY2018 FY2019 FY2020* Grand Total JDAM Nominal Cost ($m) $192.32 $346.38 $127.25 $144.61 $250.47 $228.44 $533.98 $682.11 $1,149.39 $1,010.55 $1,148.90 $10,178.07 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $228.46 $404.79 $146.47 $164.14 $280.29 $251.78 $578.21 $724.11 $1,195.78 $1,030.75 $1,148.90 $11,995.77 Quantity 7,517 13,061 4,259 4,678 10,415 8,786 22,478 28,596 42,864 39,688 40,388 412,127 LRASM Nominal Cost ($m) $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $125.75 $169.46 $165.58 $143.20 $603.99 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $133.50 $176.30 $168.89 $143.20 $621.88 Quantity - - - - - - - 36 50 50 48 184 SDB Nominal Cost ($m) $141.69 $119.22 $20.14 $1.97 $- $51.30 $135.12 $251.36 $384.25 $209.36 $275.44 $2,013.32 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $168.32 $139.33 $23.18 $2.24 $- $56.54 $146.31 $266.84 $399.76 $213.54 $275.44 $2,214.16 Quantity 2,694 2,785 150 - - 443 3,494 4,507 7,471 5,744 7,078 41,169 SDB II Nominal Cost ($m) $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $20.97 $192.13 $330.90 $544.00 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $21.81 $195.97 $330.90 $548.69 Quantity - - - - - - - - 90 1,260 1,925 3,275 SM-6 Nominal Cost ($m) $- $246.65 $356.88 $332.54 $300.19 $404.46 $417.25 $491.21 $491.26 $490.21 $488.31 $4,018.96 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $- $288.25 $410.77 $377.45 $335.93 $445.79 $451.82 $521.46 $511.09 $500.01 $488.31 $4,330.87 Quantity - 67 89 89 93 100 101 125 125 125 125 1,039 Tomahawk Nominal Cost ($m) $276.50 $596.67 $297.61 $293.58 $307.46 $317.46 $202.31 $297.51 $187.35 $98.57 $386.73 $6,348.64 Constant Cost ($m FY2020) $328.46 $697.29 $342.55 $333.24 $344.06 $349.89 $219.07 $315.82 $194.92 $100.54 $386.73 $7,651.42 Quantity 196 417 196 196 206 243 149 196 100 - 90 5,074 Source: Department of Defense Budget FY2000-2020 P-1 Procurement budget requests, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Budget-Materials/, Department of Defense National Defense Budget Estimate for FY2020 pp. 58-59, at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2020/FY20_Green_Book.pdf, Air Force FY2020 Missile procurement budget justifications; Army FY2020 Missile procurement budget justifications; Navy FY2020 Weapons procurement budget justifications. Precision-Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service R45996 · VERSION 6 · UPDATED 38 Author Information John R. Hoehn Analyst in Military Capabilities and Programs Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 		2020-04-24T12:25:53-0400
Intelligence Community Support to Pandemic Preparedness and Response https://crsreports.congress.gov May 6, 2020Intelligence Community Support to Pandemic Preparedness and ResponseIntroduction Congressional interest in Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) includes understanding its origins, how it evolved into a global pandemic, and the effectiveness of measures to mitigate its impact on communities. Multiple government agencies are involved in responding to these queries both domestically and globally. The Intelligence Community (IC), for example, supports disease surveillance efforts of the Department of Health and Human Services’ (HHS) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The use of surveillance in the COVID-19 response has raised concerns among privacy and civil liberties advocates about what “surveillance” means, and which government agencies are responsible for implementing surveillance programs. There are also questions some have raised about what the United States knows about the origins of the pandemic and when it first learned of its existence. This In Focus describes and explains the IC’s specific role in pandemic preparedness and response. Key Non-Intelligence Surveillance Terms Public Health Surveillance. “The ongoing, systematic collection, analysis, and interpretation of health-related data essential to planning, implementation, and evaluation of public health practice.” The IC is generally not involved in public health surveillance Biosurveillance. “The process of gathering near real-time biological data that relate to human and zoonotic disease activity and threats to human or animal health, in order to achieve early warning and identification of such health threats, early detection and prompt ongoing tracking of health events, and overall situational awareness of disease activity.” The IC may be involved in supporting biosurveillance. Intelligence Community Authorities to Conduct Surveillance and Collection The IC has statutory authority on the collection and reporting of information relevant to infectious diseases, especially in the foreign environment. The goal of the IC, as stated in Executive Order (E.O.) 12333, United States Intelligence Activities, is to provide “the President, National Security Council, and Homeland Security Council with the necessary information on which to base decisions concerning the development and conduct of foreign, defense, and economic policies, and the protection of United States national interests from foreign security threats.” Foreign Intelligence Intelligence related to foreign security threats is generally understood as foreign intelligence, which E.O. 12333 defines as “information relating to the capabilities, intentions, or activities of foreign governments or elements thereof, foreign organizations, foreign persons, or international terrorists.” Although foreign intelligence is primarily collected in a foreign environment, there are opportunities to collect foreign intelligence and counterintelligence domestically. The IC’s authority to collect foreign intelligence and counterintelligence within the United States is subject to policies and procedures approved by the Attorney General. No foreign intelligence or counterintelligence may be collected domestically for the purpose of indirectly acquiring information about the domestic activities of U.S. persons. Medical Intelligence Medical intelligence is a category of foreign intelligence that the Department of Defense (DOD) defines as “resulting from collection, evaluation, analysis, and interpretation of foreign medical, bio-scientific, and environmental information that is of interest to strategic planning and to military medical planning and operations for the conservation of the fighting strength of friendly forces and the formation of assessments of foreign medical capabilities in both military and civilian sectors.” Medical intelligence related to a pandemic could include, for example, intelligence on the foreign origins of, foreign government reporting on, and responses to, a pandemic. The IC role in collecting and assessing medical intelligence may include corroborating information from secondary sources and providing original reporting on matters that may not be publicly available. Examples of medical intelligence that could be collected by the IC include information that might indicate efforts by a foreign government to conceal or manipulate material regarding a health emergency or evidence of efforts by terrorist groups to weaponize biological agents to attack the U.S. homeland or interests overseas. Medical intelligence could be used to assess possible human, political, and economic impacts of pandemics, such as threat to food and medical supply chains and the readiness of foreign or U.S. military forces. Intelligence Community Collection and Reporting on Health Security The National Intelligence Strategy of 2019 includes among its mission objectives the collection and analysis of information that provides indications and warning of events or changing conditions of concern to U.S. national security. The strategy identifies infectious disease as one of a number of pressure points that can exacerbate migration and refugee flows and contribute to international instability. Intelligence Community Support to Pandemic Preparedness and Response https://crsreports.congress.gov In addition, the Director of National Intelligence’s (DNI) annual Worldwide Threat Assessments briefed to Congress have regularly included a general warning underscoring the potentially devastating human and economic costs posed by the threat of a pandemic or global health emergency. These annual assessments do not provide specific indications of a pandemic, however. Within the IC, those can come in the form of intelligence tippers (alert messages) or summary products such as the President’s Daily Brief (PDB) drawn from multiple sources. IC Elements Supporting Pandemic Detection and Response Of seventeen IC elements, the ones that may be most likely to support pandemic preparedness and response with medical foreign intelligence include the Office of the DNI (ODNI), the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), National Security Agency (NSA), National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA), the Defense Intelligence Agency’s (DIA) National Center for Medical Intelligence (NCMI), and the Department of Homeland Security’s (DHS) Office of Intelligence and Analysis (I&A). The intelligence organization dedicated to providing the collection, analysis, and production of foreign medical intelligence is NCMI. Staffed by epidemiologists, virologists, veterinarians, toxicologists, and medical doctors, NCMI supports DOD with products and services that could include warnings of disease outbreaks with the potential to cause a pandemic or global health emergency, as well as foreign medical research and technology developments and the possible effect on U.S. or foreign military readiness. The HHS CDC Global Disease Detection Operations Center (GDDOC) and the DHS National Biosurveillance Integration Center (NBIC) also compile information from the IC classified sources, international partnerships, domestic surveillance in the field, open-source internet research, and interagency coordination to provide early warning of and timely response to a pandemic or global health emergency. Recently enacted legislation intends to clarify the IC’s role in supporting pandemic detection and response. The Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness and Advancing Innovation Act (P.L. 116-22 § 402, enacted June 24, 2019), among other things, integrates the IC into a government-wide network, the Public Health Emergency Medical Countermeasures Enterprise (PHEMCE).This entity is chaired by the HHS Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response with the goal of more effectively monitoring and responding to a global health emergency.  As a member of the Enterprise, the DNI provides assessments of emerging threats of infectious disease (along with assessments of chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear, threats, as required).  Section 205 of the act also provides for the Secretary, HHS to periodically update the DNI on public health situational awareness and the biosurveillance network. The IC and Domestic Surveillance In the past the IC conducted domestic surveillance in violation of the Fourth Amendment of the Constitution. These instances, when made public, triggered congressional hearings in the mid-1970s that resulted in the establishment of the two permanent congressional select committees on intelligence, the creation of a detailed statutory intelligence oversight framework, and strict limitations on IC domestic intelligence activities. Consequently, IC capabilities are necessarily oriented toward foreign rather than domestic intelligence collection. Yet in extenuating circumstances could IC capabilities, such as geospatial products and services, support domestic efforts to respond to a pandemic? The only explicit E.O. 12333 exception allowing the IC to conduct domestic collection of information not constituting foreign intelligence, which could conceivably involve support to a pandemic response, is the authority to conduct overhead (satellite or airborne) surveillance “not directed at specific United States persons.” The NGA, for example, has previously provided support to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Therefore, while the IC has surveillance capabilities, it is not currently well positioned to provide added benefit to the capabilities of national, state and local public health authorities in a domestic context. Supplemental appropriations measures have included CDC funding for public health surveillance and disease detection both domestically and globally. Public health surveillance is not an intelligence activity, however. Rather, it applies to non-intelligence activities, such as health data collection, by national, state, and local health entities. Certain HHS biosurveillance programs such as CDC’s Epidemic Intelligence Service, also do not directly involve the IC community. Relevant Statutes Title 42 U.S. Code, §§247(d)-6, 300(hh)-10 Title 50, U.S. Code, §3002 (E.O. 12333) CRS Products CRS Legal Sidebar LSB10449, COVID-19, Digital Surveillance, and Privacy: Fourth Amendment Considerations, by Michael A. Foster CRS Insight IN11361, COVID-19: U.S. Public Health Data and Reporting, by Kavya Sekar CRS In Focus IF11461, The Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA): 2020-2024, by Tiaji Salaam-Blyther Other Resources DOD Instruction 6420.01, National Center for Medical Intelligence (NCMI), change 2 of April 25, 2018 Michael E. DeVine, Analyst in Intelligence and National Security IF11537Intelligence Community Support to Pandemic Preparedness and Response https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF11537 · VERSION 2 · NEW Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. https://crsreports.congress.gov/		2020-05-11T15:40:30-0400
Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities April 30, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov R46337 Congressional Research Service SUMMARY Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities The sale and export of U.S.-origin weapons to foreign countries (“defense articles and defense services,” officially) are governed by an extensive set of laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. Congress has authorized such sales under two laws:  The Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, 22 U.S.C. §2151, et seq.  The Arms Export Control Act (AECA) of 1976, 22 U.S.C. §2751, et seq. The FAA and AECA govern all transfers of U.S.-origin defense articles and services, whether they are commercial sales, government-to-government sales, or security assistance/security cooperation grants (or building partnership capacity programs provided by U.S. military personnel). These measures can be provided by Title 22 (Foreign Relations) or Title 10 (Armed Services) authorities. Arms sold or transferred under these authorities are regulated by the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) and the U.S. Munitions List (USML), which are located in Title 22, Parts 120-130 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The two main methods for the sale and export of U.S.-made weapons are the Foreign Military Sales (FMS) program and Direct Commercial Sales (DCS) licenses. Some other arms sales occur from current Department of Defense (DOD) stocks through Excess Defense Articles (EDA) provisions.  For FMS, the U.S. government procures defense articles as an intermediary for foreign partners’ acquisition of defense articles and defense services, which ensures that the articles have the same benefits and protections that apply to the U.S. military’s acquisition of its own articles and services.  For DCS, registered U.S. firms may sell defense articles directly to foreign partners though licenses and agreements received from the Department of State. Firms are still required to obtain State Department approval, and for major sales DOD review and congressional notification is required. In some cases where U.S. firms have entered into international partnerships to produce some major weapons systems, comprehensive export regulations under 22 CFR 126.14 are intended to allow exports and technical data for those systems without having to go through the licensing process. Congress has amended the FAA and AECA to restrict arms sales to foreign entities for a variety of reasons. These include restrictions on transfers to countries that violate human rights and states that support terrorism, as well as limitations on specific countries at certain times, such as any Middle East countries whose import of U.S. arms would adversely affect Israel’s qualitative military edge. Arms transfers to Taiwan are governed under the Taiwan Relations Act of 1979, P.L. 96-8, 22 U.S.C. §3301 et seq. Under the AECA, Congress can also overturn individual notified arms sales via a joint resolution. During the 116th Congress, such joint resolutions were introduced in opposition to planned arms sales to Saudi Arabia, but did not pass. All U.S. defense articles and defense services sold, leased, or exported under the AECA are subject to end-use monitoring (to provide reasonable assurance that the recipient is complying with the requirements imposed by the U.S. government with respect to use, transfers, and security of the articles and services) to be conducted by the President (Section 40A of the AECA) to ensure compliance with U.S. arms export rules and policies. FMS transfers are monitored under DOD’s Golden Sentry program and DCS transfers are monitored under the State Department’s Blue Lantern program. R46337 April 30, 2020 Nathan J. Lucas Section Research Manager Michael J. Vassalotti Section Research Manager Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Sales and Security Assistance/Cooperation Programs .............................................................. 2 Security Assistance/Security Cooperation Programs ................................................................ 3 Sales and Exports of U.S. Defense Articles in Statute, Administration Policy, and Regulation .................................................................................................................................... 4 The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and the Arms Export Control Act of 1976 ................ 4 National Security Presidential Memorandum Regarding U.S. Conventional Arms Transfer Policy: NSPM-10 .............................................................................................. 6 Title 22, Code of Federal Regulations, Foreign Relations .................................................. 7 DOD’s Security Assistance Management Manual .............................................................. 8 Sales and Exports of U.S. Defense Articles in International Agreements ....................................... 8 Missile Technology Control Regime .................................................................................. 9 The Wassenaar Arrangement............................................................................................... 9 Foreign Military Sales Process ...................................................................................................... 10 Letters of Request (LOR) Start the Process ....................................................................... 11 Letters of Offer and Acceptance (LOA) Set Terms ........................................................... 12 Reports to Congress .......................................................................................................... 12 Case Executions Deliver Articles ...................................................................................... 13 Customs Clearance............................................................................................................ 14 Direct Commercial Sales Process .................................................................................................. 15 DOS Role in DCS ............................................................................................................. 15 DOD Role in DCS ............................................................................................................ 17 Excess Defense Articles ................................................................................................................ 18 Interagency Relationships in Arms Sales ...................................................................................... 19 State Department Policy Prerogatives ..................................................................................... 19 DOD Policy and Implementation Role ................................................................................... 20 End-Use Monitoring (EUM) ......................................................................................................... 22 State Department’s Blue Lantern Program (DCS) .................................................................. 22 DOD’s Golden Sentry Program (FMS) ................................................................................... 22 Enhanced EUM—Golden Sentry ............................................................................................ 23 Questions for Congressional Consideration .................................................................................. 23 Do Current Levels of Arms Sales and Exports Fulfill Statutory and Policy Objectives? .................................................................................................................... 23 Are Current Methods of Conducting Sales of Defense Articles and Services Consistent with the Intent and Objectives of the AECA? .............................................. 24 Are End Use Monitoring Programs Resourced Adequately? ............................................ 25 Figures Figure 1. Foreign Military Sales (FMS) Process ............................................................................ 11 Figure 2. Direct Commercial Sales (DCS) Licensing Process in Comparison with FMS ............. 17 Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service Tables Table 1. Foreign Military Sales (FMS) Totals, FY2016 to FY2018 ................................................ 2 Table 2. Value of Direct Commercial Sales (DCS) Licenses Issued, FY2016 to FY2018 .............. 3 Appendixes Appendix. Selected Legislative Restrictions on Sales and Export of U.S. Defense Articles ........ 26 Contacts Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 28 Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction The sale of U.S-origin armaments and other “defense articles1” has been a part of national security policy since at least the Lend-Lease programs in the lead-up to U.S. involvement in World War II. Historically, Presidents have used sales of defense articles and services to foreign governments and organizations to further broad foreign policy goals, ranging from sales to strategically important countries during the Cold War, to building global counterterrorism capacity following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. The sale of U.S. defense articles to foreign countries is governed by a broad set of statutes, public laws, federal regulations, and executive branch policies, along with international agreements. An interconnected body of legislative provisions, authorizations, and reporting requirements related to the transfer of U.S. defense articles appears in both the National Defense Authorization Acts (NDAA) and in the State Department, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs (SFOPS) Appropriations Acts.2 These laws reflect the roles that both the Department of State and the Department of Defense (DOD) take in the administration of the sale, export, and funding of defense articles to foreign countries, which can be found in both Title 22 (Foreign Relations) and Title 10 (Armed Services) of the United States Code. Congress enacted the current statutory framework for the sale and export of defense articles to other countries mainly through two laws—The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961(FAA), 22 U.S.C §2151, et seq., and the Arms Export Control Act of 1976 (AECA), 22 U.S.C. §2751, et seq.3 Among other provisions, the FAA established broad policy guidelines for the overall transfer of defense articles and services from the United States to foreign entities (foreign countries, firms, and/or individuals) to include both sales and grant transfers, while the AECA also governs the sales of defense articles and services to those entities. This report describes the major statutory provisions governing the sale and export of defense articles—Foreign Military Sales (FMS) and Direct Commercial Sales (DCS)—and outlines the process through which those sales and exports are made. FMS is the program through which the U.S. government, through interaction with purchasers, acts as a broker to procure defense articles for sales to certain foreign countries and organizations, also called eligible purchasers. In DCS, the U.S. government does not act as a broker for the sale, but still must license it, unless export of the item is exempt from licensing according to regulations in the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR), contained in Subchapter M, 22 CFR 120-130, described below. The President designates what items are deemed to be defense articles or defense services, and thus 1 “Defense Article” is defined by Section 644 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, 22 U.S.C. §2403, as (1) any weapon, weapons system, munition, aircraft, vessel, boat or other implement of war; (2) any property, installation, commodity, material, equipment, supply, or goods used for the purposes of furnishing military assistance; (3) any machinery, facility, tool, material supply, or other item necessary for the manufacture, production, processing repair, servicing, storage, construction, transportation, operation, or use of any article listed in this subsection; or (4) any component or part of any article listed in this subsection; but shall not include merchant vessels or, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. §2011), source material (except uranium depleted in the isotope 235 which is incorporated in defense articles solely to take advantage of high density or pyrophoric characteristics unrelated to radioactivity), by-product material, special nuclear material, production facilities, utilization facilities, or atomic weapons or articles involving Restricted Data. 2 See CRS Report R44602, DOD Security Cooperation: An Overview of Authorities and Issues, by Bolko J. Skorupski and Nina M. Serafino. 3 The AECA superseded the Foreign Military Sales Act of 1968, P.L. 90-629. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 2 subject to DCS licensing, via the U.S. Munitions List (USML). All persons (other than U.S. government personnel performing official duties) engaging in manufacturing, acting as a broker, exporting, or importing defense articles and services must register with the State Department according to ITAR procedures.4 The State Department is required under the AECA to notify Congress 15 to 30 days prior to all planned FMS and DCS cases over a certain value threshold. Congress can, pursuant to the AECA, hold or restrict such sales via a joint resolution. The report also provides a select list of specific legislative limitations on arms sales and end use monitoring requirements found in the Arms Export Control Act. Future updates will consider policy implications and issues for Congress. Sales and Security Assistance/Cooperation Programs In FY2018, the latest year complete agency data is available, the value of authorized U.S. arms sales to foreign governments and export licenses issued totaled about $184.3 billion. Foreign entities purchased $47.71 billion in FMS cases and the value of privately contracted DCS authorizations licensed by the State Department (distinct from actual deliveries of licensed articles and services) totaled $136.6 billion (Table 1 and Table 2).5 That same year, the State Department requested $7.09 billion (base and OCO) for all of its Title 22 security assistance authorities in its International Security Assistance account, while DOD executed $4.42 billion for Title 10 security cooperation authorities,6 totaling $11.51 billion, or 24.1% of what foreign entities spent on FMS and 8.4% of the amount of DCS approved licenses. Table 1. Foreign Military Sales (FMS) Totals, FY2016 to FY2018 Fiscal Year Partner Nation Funded U.S Funded Title 22 Authorizations U.S. Funded Title 10 Authorizations Total FY2018 $47.71 billion $3.52 billion $4.42 billion $55.66 billion FY2017 $32.02 billion $6.04 billion $3.87 billion $41.93 billion FY2016 $25.7 billion $2.9 billion $5.0 billion $33.6 billion Source: Defense Security Cooperation Agency; see footnote 5. 4 Manufacturers must register, even if they are not currently exporting defense items. 5 Defense Security Cooperation Agency, “Fiscal Year 2018 Sales Total $55.56 Billion,” October 9, 2018, https://dsca.mil/news-media/news-archive/fiscal-year-2018-sales-total-5566-billion; “Fiscal Year 2017 Sales Total $41.93B,” https://www.dsca.mil/news-media/news-archive/fiscal-year-2017-sales-total-4193b; “Fiscal Year 2016 Sales Total $33.6B,” https://www.dsca.mil/news-media/news-archive/fiscal-year-2016-sales-total-336b. Department of State, “U.S. Arms Transfers Rise 13 Percent in 2018, Highlighting Administration’s Success Strengthening Security Partners While Growing American Jobs,” May 21, 2019, https://www.state.gov/u-s-arms-transfers-rise-13-percent-in-2018-highlighting-administrations-success-strengthening-security-partners-while-growing-american-jobs/. DCS totals from FY2016 were provided by the State Department to CRS on April 28, 2020. 6 State Department, FY2019 Congressional Budget Justification—Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs, https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/FY-2019-Congressional-Budget-Justification-Department-of-State-Foreign-Operations-and-Related-Programs.pdf, accessed March 5, 2020. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 3 Table 2. Value of Direct Commercial Sales (DCS) Licenses Issued, FY2016 to FY2018 Fiscal Year Value of DCS Licenses FY2018 $136.6 billion FY2017 $128.1 billion FY2016 $117.9 billion Source: U.S. State Department; see footnote 5. Security Assistance/Security Cooperation Programs While most arms sales and exports are paid for by the recipient government or entity, transfers funded by U.S. security assistance or security cooperation grants to foreign security forces comprise a small portion of arms exports, but they are beyond the scope of this report. These transfers are generally considered foreign assistance, and are authorized pursuant to the FAA, annual National Defense Authorization Acts, and other authorities codified in Title 22 and Title 10 of the U.S. Code. With the exception of Title 10 authorities, the FAA and AECA also govern all of the transfers of U.S.-origin defense articles and services, whether they are commercial sales, government-to-government sales, or security assistance/security cooperation. Major Title 22 grant-based security assistance authorities pertaining to defense articles are  Foreign Military Financing (FMF),  Nonproliferation, Anti-Terrorism, Demining, and Related Programs (NADR),  Peacekeeping Operations (PKO).7 Major Title 10 grant-based security cooperation authorities are  Authority to Build the Capacity of Foreign Security Forces (“333 authority”),  Defense Institution Reform Initiative (DIRI),  Ministry of Defense Advisors (MDOA) program, and  Southeast Asia Maritime Security Initiative (MSI).8 DOD, through its Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA), executes most security assistance and security cooperation programs. FMF, IMET, EDA, and equipment lease cases involving the transfer of U.S-origin arms are treated as FMS cases and reported as such by DSCA. Cases executed pursuant to Title 10 authorities are also treated as FMS cases, but are 7 “Major” authorities are those with their own budget line in the State Department, FY2020 Congressional Budget Justification—Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs, https://www.state.gov/fy-2020-congressional-budget-justification-department-of-state-foreign-operations-and-related-programs/. International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement (INCLE) and International Military Education and Training (IMET) security assistance programs do not transfer military arms. See also CRS Report R44602, DOD Security Cooperation: An Overview of Authorities and Issues, by Bolko J. Skorupski and Nina M. Serafino. 8 “Major” authorities are those with their own budget line in the Defense Security Cooperation Agency, Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 President’s Budget: Operation and Maintenance, Defense Wide, Defense Security Cooperation Agency, March 2019. https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2020/budget_justification/pdfs/01_Operation_and_Maintenance/O_M_VOL_1_PART_1/DSCA_OP-5.pdf, accessed March 5, 2020. DSCA has, since FY2019, merged the Counterterrorism Partnership Fund (CTPF) and Building the Capacity of Foreign Security Forces lines into a single “Security Cooperation Account.” Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 4 referred to by practitioners as “pseudo-FMS” cases because they often involve a focus on training of foreign forces as well as on the transfer of arms. Sales and Exports of U.S. Defense Articles in Statute, Administration Policy, and Regulation The broad set of statutes, public laws, federal regulations, executive branch policies, and international agreements governing the sale of U.S. defense articles to foreign countries include the following. The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and the Arms Export Control Act of 1976 As noted above, the primary statutes covering the sale and export of U.S. defense articles to foreign countries are the FAA (P.L. 87-195, as amended) and AECA (P.L. 90-629, as amended). The FAA expresses, as U.S. policy, that the efforts of the United States and other friendly countries to promote peace and security continue to require measures of support based upon the principle of effective self-help and mutual aid, [and that its purpose is] to authorize measures in the common defense against internal and external aggression, including the furnishing of military assistance, upon request, to friendly countries and international organizations.9 The AECA states that it is the sense of Congress that all such sales be approved only when they are consistent with the foreign policy of the United States, the purposes of the foreign assistance program of the United States as embodied in the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, the extent and character of the military requirement and the economic and financial capability of the recipient country, with particular regard being given, where appropriate, to proper balance among such sales, grant military assistance, and economic assistance as well as to the impact of the sales on programs of social and economic development and on existing or incipient arms races.10 The FAA also establishes the U.S. policy for how recipient countries are to utilize defense articles sold or otherwise transferred. Section 502 states that defense articles and defense services to any country shall be furnished solely for internal security (including for antiterrorism and nonproliferation purposes), for legitimate self-defense, to permit the recipient country to participate in regional or collective arrangements or measures consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, or otherwise to permit the recipient country to participate in collective measures requested by the United Nations for the purpose of assisting foreign military forces in less developed friendly countries (or the voluntary efforts of personnel of the Armed Forces of the United States in such countries) to construct public works or to engage in other activities helpful to the economic and social development of such friendly countries.11 Section 22 of the AECA, provides the statutory basis for the U.S. Foreign Military Sales program and allows the U.S. government to interact with purchaser as a broker to procure defense articles for sales to certain foreign countries and organizations, also called eligible purchasers. Under this 9 22 U.S.C. §2301. 10 22 U.S.C. §2751. 11 22 U.S.C. §2302. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 5 provision, the President may, without requirement for charge to any appropriation or contract authorization, enter into contracts to sell defense articles or defense services to a foreign country or international organization if it provides the U.S. government with a dependable undertaking to pay the full amount of the contract.12 The Taiwan Relations Act of 1979 An exception to the general arms transfer framework is Taiwan, to which the sale of defense articles and defense services are not subject to the FAA or AECA. Rather, the applicable statute governing FMS-like and DCS-like transfers to Taiwan is the Taiwan Relations Act of 1979, P.L. 96-8, 22 U.S.C. §3301 et seq. The act states, “In furtherance of the policy set forth in section 3301 of this title, the United States will make available to Taiwan such defense articles and defense services in such quantity as may be necessary to enable Taiwan to maintain a sufficient self-defense capability.” It also states, “The President and the Congress shall determine the nature and quantity of such defense articles and services based solely upon their judgment of the needs of Taiwan, in accordance with procedures established by law. Such determination of Taiwan’s defense needs shall include review by United States military authorities in connection with recommendations to the President and the Congress.”13 In addition, the FY2018 National Defense Authorization Act, P.L. 115-91, Section 1259A, requires congressional notification of all requests for transfers of defense articles or defense services to Taiwan no later than 120 days after the Secretary of Defense receives a Letter of Request. The act also states that the sense of Congress is “that any requests from the Government of Taiwan for defense articles and defense services should receive a case-by-case review by the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the Secretary of State, that is consistent with the standard processes and procedures in an effort to normalize the arms sales process with Taiwan.” Section 38 of the AECA furthermore provides the statutory basis for the U.S. Direct Commercial Sales of defense articles and services. Under this provision, the U.S. government does not act as a broker for the sale, but still must license it, unless specifically provided for in regulations in the International Traffic in Arms Regulations, contained in Subchapter M, 22 CFR 120-130, described below. The President designates what items are deemed to be defense articles or defense services, and thus subject to DCS licensing, via the U.S. Munitions List. All persons (other than U.S. government personnel performing official duties) engaging in manufacturing, acting as a broker, exporting, or importing defense articles and services must register with the State Department according to ITAR procedures.14 The provision also requires the President to review the items on the USML and to notify the House Foreign Affairs Committee, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and the Senate Banking Committee if any items no longer warrant export controls, pursuant to the ITAR. 12 22 U.S.C. §2762(a). 13 P.L. 96-8, §3, 22 U.S.C. §3302 (a) and (b). 14 Manufacturers must register, even if they are not currently exporting defense items. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 6 Title 10 United States Code, Armed Forces U.S.-origin defense articles sold to foreign entities may be used by the recipient country’s military in conjunction with DOD-led security cooperation programs. As such, the FY2017 NDAA, P.L. 114-238, consolidated many of DOD’s core security cooperation authorities into a new chapter, Chapter 16, of Title 10.15 While primarily applicable to grant-based security cooperation programs, the section with some relevance to arms sales is 10 U.S.C §333, which states that the Secretary of Defense, in concurrence and coordination with the Secretary of State, “is authorized to conduct or support a program or programs to provide training and equipment to the national security forces of one or more foreign countries for the purpose of building the capacity of such forces to conduct one or more of the following: (1) Counterterrorism operations. (2) Counter-weapons of mass destruction operations. (3) Counter-illicit drug trafficking operations. (4) Counter-transnational organized crime operations. (5) Maritime and border security operations. (6) Military intelligence operations. (7) Operations or activities that contribute to an international coalition operation that is determined by the Secretary to be in the national interest of the United States.”16 A partner country may participate in train and equip programs under Title 10, section 333, and simultaneously pay part of the equipment costs associated with those programs under traditional FMS or DCS. The country could also simultaneously receive Title 22 security assistance and could use those defense articles in conjunction with a Title 10 security cooperation program. U.S. Security Cooperation Office (SCO) personnel in country would oversee requirements applicable to all of those programs in such a case. National Security Presidential Memorandum Regarding U.S. Conventional Arms Transfer Policy: NSPM-10 In April 2018, the Trump Administration, citing the AECA, issued a National Security Presidential Memorandum, NSPM-10, outlining its policy concerning the transfer of conventional arms. The memorandum reflects many of the policy statements of the FAA and AECA in aiming to “bolster the security of the United States and our allies and partners,” while preventing proliferation by exercising restraint and continuing to participate in multilateral nonproliferation arrangements such as the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) and Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies. It explicitly commits the U.S. government to continue to meet the requirements of all applicable statues, including the AECA, the FAA, the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, and the annual NDAAs. NSPM-10 also prioritizes efforts to “increase trade opportunities for United States companies, including by supporting United States industry with appropriate advocacy and trade promotion activities and by simplifying the United States regulatory environment.”17 In addition, NSPM-10 directs the executive branch to consider the following in making arms transfer decisions:  the national security of the United States, including the transfer’s effect on the technological advantage of the United States; 15 CRS In Focus IF10582, Security Cooperation Issues: FY2017 NDAA Outcomes, by Liana W. Rosen. 16 10 U.S.C. §333. 17 The White House, “National Security Presidential Memorandum Regarding U.S. Conventional Arms Transfer Policy,” April 19, 2018, https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/national-security-presidential-memorandum-regarding-u-s-conventional-arms-transfer-policy/. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 7  the economic security of the United States and innovation;  relationships with allies and partners;  human rights and international humanitarian law; and  nonproliferation implications.18 Title 22, Code of Federal Regulations, Foreign Relations The AECA, Section 38, also authorizes the President to issue regulations on the import and export of defense articles. As noted above, the catalog of defense articles subject to these regulations is called the United States Munitions List. The USML is found in federal regulations at 22 CFR 121. The series of federal regulations for importing and exporting of defense articles—the International Traffic in Arms Regulations—is contained in Subchapter M, 22 CFR 120-130. The USML lists defense articles by category and identifies which of those articles are “significant military equipment” further restricted by provisions in the AECA.19 The President has delegated authority for administering the USML and associated regulations to the Secretary of State, who in turn has delegated this authority to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Defense Trade Controls in the Bureau of Political-Military Affairs (PM).20 The Directorate of Defense Trade Controls (DDTC) is responsible for ensuring that commercial exports of defense articles and defense services advance U.S. national security objectives. DDTC also administers a public web portal for U.S. firms seeking assistance with exporting defense articles and services.21 Global Comprehensive Export Authorizations: The F-35 In cases where U.S. defense manufacturers are involved in international partnerships with NATO countries, Australia, Japan, and/or Sweden for major defense article programs, 22 CFR 126.14 allows DDTC to provide a comprehensive “Global Project Authorization.” The authorization applies to registered U.S. exporters for exports of defense articles, technical data, and defense services in support of government-to-government cooperative projects (authorized under Section 27 of the AECA, 22 U.S.C. §2767) with one of these countries. Such cooperation would occur pursuant to an agreement between the U.S. Government and the government of the foreign country or a memorandum of understanding (MOU) between the DOD and the foreign country’s ministry of defense. An example is the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter, manufactured though a partnership between the United States and eight partner countries (as well as through FMS agreements with three other countries). The global comprehensive export authorization for the F-35 allows approved U.S. manufacturers to export items or technical data involved in the research and development, testing and evaluation, and procurement of the system to firms in partner countries without going through the formal DDTC licensing process.22 The Global Project Authorization is one of three special comprehensive export authorizations allowed in 22 CFR 126.14. The other two, Major Project Authorization and Major Program Authorization, are based on the principal registered U.S. exporter/prime contractor or a single registered U.S. exporter that identifies a large-scale cooperative project or program with a NATO member, Australia, Japan, or Sweden. 18 Ibid. 19 22 C.F.R. §121. 20 22 C.F.R. §120.1. 21 U.S. Department of State, “Directorate of Defense Trade Controls,” https://www.pmddtc.state.gov/ddtc_public. 22 Government Accountability Office, Joint Strike Fighter: Management of the Technology Transfer Process, GAO-06-364, March 2006, https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-06-364. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 8 Canadian Exemptions in Federal Regulations In some cases, Canadian purchasers are exempt from export license requirements for defense articles and services. According to 22 CFR 126.5, “Except as provided in Supplement No. 1 to part 126 of this subchapter and for exports that transit third countries, Port Directors of U.S. Customs and Border Protection and postmasters shall permit, when for end-use in Canada by Canadian Federal or Provincial governmental authorities acting in an official capacity or by a Canadian-registered person, or for return to the United States, the permanent and temporary export to Canada without a license of unclassified defense articles and defense services identified on the U.S. Munitions List (22 CFR 121.1). “23 Canadian purchasers must still obtain licenses for defense articles and services that are, among other categories: classified articles, technical data and defense services, all Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) Annex Items, any transaction involving the export of defense articles and defense services for which congressional notification is required, firearms listed in Category 1 of the USML, and nuclear weapons strategic delivery systems and all components, parts, accessories and attachments. DOD’s Security Assistance Management Manual The Department of Defense has a substantial role in the sale of defense articles to foreign countries through FMS, which DOD administers in coordination with the Department of State mainly through the Defense Security Cooperation Agency. DSCA provides procedures for FMS and certain other transfers of defense articles and defense services to foreign entities in its Security Assistance Management Manual (SAMM). The SAMM is used mainly by the military services, the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Special Operations Command (SOCOM), the regional combatant commanders, and country teams in U.S. embassies overseas, and it may also be consulted by foreign countries and U.S. defense contractors. The SAMM also provides the timelines and methods for coordinating FMS, cases with the State Department.24 Sales and Exports of U.S. Defense Articles in International Agreements25 The United States participates in two international agreements that broadly affect the transfer of U.S. defense articles: The Missile Technology Control Regime and the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies. Other international agreements, such as the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, the Chemical Weapons Convention, and the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention, may limit exports of defense- 23 22 CFR 126.5, https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=&SID=70e390c181ea17f847fa696c47e3140a&mc=true&r=PART&n=pt22.1.126#se22.1.126_15 . 24 Defense Security Cooperation Agency, “Security Assistance Cooperation Manual,” https://samm.dsca.mil/listing/esamm. The procedures found in the SAMM apply to sales and exports of defense articles, as well as to the defense articles provided as grant assistance to foreign countries. When DOD is involved in the transfer of defense articles or services funded by appropriations under either DOD (Title 10) or DOS (Title 22) authorities, DSCA manages the transfer through the same infrastructure as it does for Foreign Military Sales (FMS) cases, and reports the transfers in its yearly total of sales of defense articles and services. 25 In addition to the agreements discussed in this section, the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms and the Arms Trade Treaty have implications for U.S. policy regarding arms sales. They are, however, beyond the scope of this report, as they are not specifically mentioned in NSPM-10. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 9 related material, but only material linked to the development of nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons.26 Missile Technology Control Regime The Missile Technology Control Regime, while not a treaty, is an informal and voluntary association of countries seeking to reduce the number of systems capable of delivering weapons of mass destruction (other than manned aircraft), and seeking to coordinate national export licensing efforts aimed at preventing their proliferation. The MTCR was originally established in 1987 by Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States. Since then, participation has grown to 35 countries.27 Member nations, by consensus, agree on common export guidelines (the MCTR Guidelines) on transfer of systems capable of delivering weapons of mass destruction, as well as an integral common list of controlled items (the MTCR Equipment, Software and Technology Annex). The annex is a list of controlled items – both military and dual-use – including virtually all key equipment, materials, software, and technology needed for the development, production, and operation of systems capable of delivering nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons. The annex is divided into “Category I” and “Category II” items.28 Partner countries exercise restraint when considering transfers of items contained in the annex, and such transfers are considered by each partner country on a case-by-case basis.29 The State Department, Directorate of Defense Trade Controls, administers the U.S. implementation of the MTCR and incorporates the MTCR guidelines and annex into the International Traffic in Arms Regulations and the U.S. Munitions List.30 The Wassenaar Arrangement In 1996, 33 countries, including the United States, agreed to the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies. The arrangement aims “to contribute to regional and international security and stability, by promoting transparency and greater responsibility in transfers of conventional arms and dual-use goods and technologies, thus preventing destabilising accumulations.”31 It maintains two control lists. One is a list of 26 For a detailed discussion of the MTCR and agreements limiting the export of materials related to nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons, see CRS Report RL31559, Proliferation Control Regimes: Background and Status, coordinated by Mary Beth D. Nikitin. 27 The Missile Technology Control Regime, Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) Equipment, Software, and Technology Annex, October 12, 2019, https://mtcr.info/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/MTCR-TEM-Technical_Annex_2019-10-11-1.pdf. 28 According to the MTCR, Category I items are the most sensitive and include complete UAS “capable of delivering a payload of at least 500 kg to a range of at least 300 km, their major complete subsystems … and related software and technology,” as well as “specially designed” production facilities for these UAS and subsystems. Regime partners have greater flexibility with respect to authorizing exports of Category II items, which include less sensitive and dual-use missile related components. This category also includes complete UAS, regardless of payload, capable of ranges of at least 300 km, as well as other UAS with certain characteristics. See CRS In Focus IF11069, U.S.-Proposed Missile Technology Control Regime Changes, by Paul K. Kerr. 29 Ibid., p. iii. 30 Department of State, “The International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR),” https://www.pmddtc.state.gov/ddtc_public?id=ddtc_kb_article_page&sys_id=24d528fddbfc930044f9ff621f961987. The AECA mandates inclusion of the MCTR Annex on the USML. 31 The Wassenaar Arrangement, “About Us,” https://www.wassenaar.org/about-us/. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 10 weapons, including small arms, tanks, aircraft, and unmanned aerial systems. The second is a list of dual-use technologies including material processing, electronics, computers, information security, and navigation/avionics. Dual-use, in this context, means items and technologies that can be used in both civilian and military applications. DDTC incorporates the Wassennar Arrangement into the ITAR and USML.32 Under the Export Control Act of 2018 (Subtitle B, Part 1, P.L. 115-232), the Department of Commerce is to “establish and maintain a list” of controlled items, foreign persons, and end-uses determined to be a threat to U.S. national security and foreign policy. The legislation also directs the Commerce Department to require export licenses; “prohibit unauthorized exports, re-exports, and in-country transfers of controlled items”; and “monitor shipments and other means of transfer.”33 Foreign Military Sales Process The FMS program is the U.S. government-brokered method for delivering U.S. arms to eligible foreign purchasers, normally friendly nations, partner countries, and allies.34 The program is authorized through the AECA, with related authorities delegated by the President, under Executive Order 13637, to the Secretaries of State, Defense, and Commerce. The State Department (DOS) is responsible for the export (and temporary import) of defense articles and services governed by the AECA, and reviews and submits to Congress an annual Congressional Budget Justification (CBJ) for security assistance. This also includes an annual estimate of the total amount of sales and licensed commercial exports expected to be made to each foreign nation as required by 22 U.S.C §2765(a)(2)).35 DOD generally implements the FMS program as a military-to-military program and serves as intermediary for foreign partners’ acquisition of U.S. defense articles and services. Using what is commonly called the Total Package Approach, U.S. security assistance organizations must offer, in addition to specific defense articles, a sustainment package to help the buyer maintain and operate the article(s) effectively and in accord with U.S. intent.36 DOD follows the Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement (DFARS), except where deviations are authorized.37 Acquisition on behalf of eligible FMS purchasers must be in accordance with DOD regulations and other applicable U.S. government procedures. This arrangement affords the foreign purchaser the same benefits and protections that apply to DOD procurement, and it is one of the principal reasons why foreign governments and international organizations might choose to procure defense articles through FMS. FMS requirements may be consolidated with U.S. requirements or placed on separate contracts, whichever is more expedient and cost-effective.38 32 Department of State, “The International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR),” https://www.pmddtc.state.gov/ddtc_public?id=ddtc_kb_article_page&sys_id=24d528fddbfc930044f9ff621f961987. 33 CRS In Focus IF11154, Export Controls: New Challenges, by Ian F. Fergusson. 34 See 22 U.S.C.§2753 regarding provisions for eligibility for transfer of U.S. defense articles or services. 35 Department of Defense (DOD), Security Assistance Management Manual (SAMM), C1.3.1. at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-1.at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-1. 36 DOD, SAMM, C4.3.2.,at https://www.samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-4#C4.3.https://www.samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-4#C4.3. 37 DOD, SAMM, C4.3.9., at https://www.samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-4#C4.3.https://www.samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-4#C4.3. 38 DOD, SAMM, C.6.3.1., at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-6#C6.3.https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-6#C6.3. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 11 Figure 1. Foreign Military Sales (FMS) Process Source: Defense Security and Cooperation Agency, annotated by CRS. Notes: LOR = Letter of Request; LOA = Letter of Offer and Acceptance; SAMM = Security Assistance Manual. Purchasers must agree to pay in U.S. dollars, by converting their own national currency or, under limited circumstances, though reciprocal arrangements.39 When the purchase cannot be financed by other means, credit financing or credit guarantees can be extended if allowed by U.S. law. FMS cases can also be directly funded by DOS using Foreign Military Financing appropriations.40 Letters of Request (LOR) Start the Process When an eligible foreign purchaser (government or otherwise) decides to purchase or otherwise obtain a U.S. defense article or service, it begins the process by making the official request in the form of a letter of request (LOR) (See Figure 1 for an illustration of the process from receipt to case closure.) The letter may take nearly any form, from a handwritten request to a formal letter, but it must be in writing. The purchaser submits the LOR to a U.S. security cooperation organization (SCO),41 normally an Office of Defense Cooperation nested within the U.S. 39 DOD, SAMM, C9.3.2. at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-9#C9.3., see also 22 U.S.C. 2761 and 22 U.S.C. 2762. 40 DOD, SAMM, C9.7.2.1., at https://www.samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-9#C9.7.2.7.https://www.samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-9#C9.7.2.7 41 DOD, SAMM, Glossary, at https://www.samm.dsca.mil//glossary//security-cooperation-organization-sco. SCO is a generic term for those DOD organizations permanently located in a foreign country and assigned responsibilities for carrying out security cooperation management functions under Title 22 U.S.C. §2321i. The actual names given to such DOD components may include military assistance advisory groups, military missions and groups, offices of defense or Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 12 Embassy in the country, or directly to DSCA or an implementing agency (IA). The IA is usually a military department or DOD agency (e.g., Army Security Assistance Command, Navy International Programs Office, Air Force International Affairs). The LOR can be submitted in-country or through the country’s military and diplomatic personnel stationed in the United States. Unless an item has been designated as “FMS Only,” DOD is generally neutral as to whether a country purchases U.S.-origin defense articles/services through FMS or DCS (discussed below).42 The AECA gives the President discretion to designate which military end-items must be sold exclusively through FMS channels.43 This discretion is delegated to the Secretary of State under Executive Order 13637 and, as a matter of policy, this discretion is generally exercised upon the recommendation of DOD. Once the U.S. SCO receives the LOR, it transmits the request to the relevant agencies (e.g., DSCA, IA) for consideration and export licensing. U.S. government responses to LORs include price and availability (P&A) data, letters of offer and acceptance (LOAs), and other appropriate actions that respond to purchasers’ requests. If the IA recommends disapproval, it notifies DSCA, which coordinates the disapproval with DOS, as required, and formally notifies the customer of the disapproval.44 Letters of Offer and Acceptance (LOA) Set Terms After approving the transfer of a defense article, the United States responds with a letter of offer and acceptance. The LOA is the legal instrument used by the USG to sell defense articles, defense services including training, and design and construction services to an eligible purchaser. The LOA itemizes the defense articles and services offered and when implemented becomes an official tender by the USG. Signed LOAs and their subsequent amendments and modifications are also referred to as “FMS cases.” The time required to prepare LOAs varies with the complexity of the sale.45 Reports to Congress Within 60 days after the end of a quarter, the State Department, on behalf of the President, sends to the Speaker of the House, HFAC, and the chairman of the SFRC a report of, inter alia,  LOAs offering major defense equipment valued at $1 million or more;  all LOAs accepted and the total value;  the dollar amount of all credit agreements with each eligible purchaser; and  all licenses and approvals for exports sold for $1 million or more.46 military cooperation, and liaison groups. The term SCO does not include units, formations, or other ad hoc organizations that conduct security cooperation activities such as mobile training teams, mobile education teams, or operational units conducting security cooperation activities. 42 DOD, SAMM, C4.3.4., at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-4#C4.3.https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-4#C4.3. 43 The U.S. Munitions List is prescribed in 22 U.S.C. 2778(a)(1). 44 DOD, SAMM, C5.2.2.1., at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-5#C5.2.https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-5#C5.2. 45 DOD, SAMM, C5.4., at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-5#C5.4.https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-5#C5.4. 46 22 U.S.C. §2776 . Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 13 Congressional Notification Requirements for FMS47 The AECA, Section 36(b) (22 U.S.C. §2776(b)), requires State Department reporting to Congress as follows:  30 calendar days before issuing a Letter of Offer and Acceptance (LOA) for major defense equipment valued at $14 million or more, defense articles or services valued at $50 million or more, or design and construction services valued at $200 million or more.  15 calendar days before issuing an LOA for NATO member states, NATO, Japan, Australia, South Korea, Israel, or New Zealand for sale, enhancement, or upgrading of major defense equipment valued at $25 million or more, defense articles or services at $100 million or more, or design and construction services of $300 million or more. Section 36(b)(5)(a) of the AECA contains a reporting requirement for defense articles or equipment items whose technology or capability has, prior to delivery, been “enhanced or upgraded from the level of sensitivity or capability described\" in the original congressional notification. For such exports, the President must submit a report to the relevant committees at least 45 days before the exports’ delivery that describes the enhancement or upgrade and provides \"a detailed justification for such enhancement or upgrade.\" Section 36(i) of the AECA also requires the President to notify the Foreign Relations/Foreign Affairs Committees 30 calendar days prior to the shipment of FMS items requiring Congressional notification under Section 36(b) if the chairman or ranking member of either committee request such notification. Congress reviews formal notifications pursuant to procedures in the AECA and has the authority to block a sale. Case Executions Deliver Articles The IA takes action to implement a case once the purchaser has signed the LOA and necessary documentation and provided any required initial deposit. The standard types of FMS cases are defined order, blanket order, and cooperative logistics supply support arrangement (CLSSA). A CLSSA usually accompanies sales of major defense articles, providing an arrangement for supplying repair parts and other services over a specified period after delivery of the articles.48 Defined order cases or lines are commonly used for the sale of items that require item-by-item security control throughout the sales process or that require separate reporting; blanket order cases or lines are used to provide categories of items or services (normally to support one or more end items) with no definitive listing of items or quantities. Defined order and blanket order cases are routinely used to provide hardware or services to support commercial end items, obsolete end items (including end items that have undergone system support buyouts), and selected non-U.S. origin military equipment.49 The case must be implemented in all applicable data systems (e.g., Defense Security Assistance Management System [DSAMS], Defense Integrated Financial System [DIFS], DSCA 1200 System, and Military Department [MILDEP] systems) before case execution occurs. The IA issues implementing instructions to activities that are involved in executing the FMS case.50 Case execution is the longest phase of the FMS case life cycle. Case execution includes acquisition, logistics, transportation, maintenance, training, financial management, oversight, coordination, documentation, case amendment or modification, case reconciliation, and case 47 CRS Report RL31675, Arms Sales: Congressional Review Process, by Paul K. Kerr. 48 DOD, SAMM, C5.4.3., at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-5#C5.4. https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-5#C5.4 49 DOD, SAMM, C5.4.3., at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-5#C5.4. https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-5#C5.4. For Taiwan case documents, all milestones are entered in DSAMS and the IA is responsible for transferring signature dates and information onto the cover memorandum to the American Institute in Taiwan. 50 DOD, SAMM, C6.1.1., at https://www.samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-6.https://www.samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-6. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 14 reporting. Case managers, normally assigned to the IAs, track FMS delivery status in coordination with SCOs.51 FMS records, such as case directives, production or repair schedules, international logistics supply delivery plans, requisitions, shipping documents, bills of lading, contract documents, billing and accounting documents, and work sheets, are normally unclassified. All case transactions, financial and logistical, must be recorded as part of the official case file. Cost statements and large accounting spreadsheets must be supported by source documents.52 LOA requirements are fulfilled through existing U.S. military logistics systems. With the exception of excess defense articles (EDA) or obsolete equipment, items are furnished only when DOD plans to ensure logistics support for the expected item service life. This includes follow-on spare parts support. If an item will not be supported through its remaining service life, including EDA and obsolete defense articles, an explanation should be included in the LOA.53 FMS cases may be amended or modified to accommodate certain changes. An amendment is necessary when a change requires purchaser acceptance. The scope of the case is a key issue for the IA to consider in deciding whether to prepare an amendment, modification, or new LOA. In defined order cases, scope is limited to the quantity of items or described services, including specific performance periods listed on the LOA. In blanket order cases, scope is limited to the specified item or service categories and the case or line dollar value. In CLSSAs, scope is limited by the LOA description of end items to be supported and dollar values of the cases. A scope change takes place when the original purpose of a case line or note changes. U.S. government unilateral changes to an FMS case are made by a modification and do not require acceptance by the purchaser.54 “Pseudo LOAs” For Title 10 Authorizations DSCA (along with DOS and DOD elements) use the FMS infrastructure to manage some programs that are not actual FMS cases. These occur when the U.S. government provides defense articles and defense services aimed at Building Partner Capacity, or BPC. Authorized under Title 10 (the most common is 10 U.S.C.§333), and often associated with train and equip programs, cases are coordinated and processed through established security assistance automated systems designed to handle FMS. When these occur, practitioners refer to the process as a “pseudo LOA” to distinguish the cases from FMS.55 Customs Clearance In all FMS cases, the firms then ship the defense articles to the foreign partner via a third-party freight forwarding company. The security cooperation organization, part of the U.S. embassy country team, may receive the item and hand it over to the purchaser, or the purchaser may receive it directly. The U.S. government and the purchaser’s advanced planning for transportation 51 DOD, SAMM, C.6.2.2, at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-6#C6.2.https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-6#C6.2. 52 DOD, SAMM, C6.2.5., at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-6#C6.2.https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-6#C6.2. 53 DOD, SAMM, C6.4., at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-6#C6.4.https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-6#C6.4. 54 DOD, SAMM, C6.7., at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-6#C6.7.https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-6#C6.7. 55 Defense Security Cooperation Agency, The Management of Security Cooperation, p. 6-4, https://www.discs.dscu.mil/documents/greenbook/06_Chapter.pdf?id=1. See also CRS Report R44313, What Is “Building Partner Capacity?” Issues for Congress, coordinated by Kathleen J. McInnis. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 15 of materiel is critical for case development and execution. DOD policy requires that the purchaser is responsible for transportation and delivery of its purchased materiel. Purchasers can use DOD distribution capabilities on a reimbursable basis at DOD reimbursable rates via the Defense Transportation System (DTS). Alternatively, purchasers may employ an agent, known as a Foreign Military Sales freight forwarder, to manage transportation and delivery from the point of origin (typically the continental United States) to the purchaser’s desired destination.56 Ultimately, the purchaser is responsible for obtaining overseas customs clearances and for all actions and costs associated with customs clearances for deliveries of FMS materiel, including any intermediate stops or transfer points.57 Generally, title to FMS materiel is transferred to the purchaser upon release from its point of origin, normally a DOD supply activity, unless otherwise specified in the LOA. However, U.S. government security responsibility does not cease until the recipient’s designated government representative assumes control of the consignment.58 Direct Commercial Sales Process DOS Role in DCS While an export license is not required for the FMS transfers,59 registered U.S. firms may sell defense articles directly to foreign partners via licenses received from the State Department. In this case, the request for defense articles and/or defense services may originate as a result of interaction between the U.S. firm and a foreign government, may be initiated through the country team in U.S. embassies overseas, or may be generated by foreign diplomatic or defense personnel stationed in the United States. A significant difference between DCS licenses and FMS cases is that in DCS, the U.S government does not participate in the sale or broker the defense articles or services for transfer by the U.S. government to the foreign country. While DCS originates between registered U.S. firms and foreign customers, an application for an export license goes through a review process similar to FMS (Figure 2, below). DOS and DOD have agency review processes that assess proposed DCS transfers for foreign policy, national security, human rights, and nonproliferation concerns. In order for a U.S. firm to export defense articles or services on the U.S. Munitions List, it must first register with the State Department, Directorate of Defense Trade Controls. It must then obtain export licenses for all defense articles and follow the International Traffic in Arms Regulations.60 Once granted, an export license is valid for four years, after which a new application and license are required.61 56 DOD, SAMM, C7.1.1.., at https://www.samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-7#C7.2.https://www.samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-7#C7.2. 57 DOD, SAMM, C3.3.3.2. and C3.3.3.4.3., at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-3#C3.3.https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-3#C3.3. 58 DOD, SAMM, C7.3, at https://samm.dsca.mil//chapter//chapter-7#C7.3. A supply activity can be either a DOD storage depot or a commercial vendor that furnishes materiel under a DOD-administered contract. 59 DOD, SAMM, C3.3.1, at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-3#C3.3.https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-3#C3.3. 60 Firms may do so through DDTC’s website: https://www.pmddtc.state.gov//ddtc_public. 61 22 CFR 123.21. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 16 Congressional Notification Requirements for DCS62 The AECA, Section 36(b) (22 U.S.C. §2776(c)), specifies reporting to Congress on the following:  30 calendar days before issuing an export license for major defense equipment valued at $14 million or more, or defense articles or services valued at $50 million or more.  15 calendar days before issuing an export license for NATO member states, NATO, Japan, Australia, South Korea, Israel, or New Zealand for sale, enhancement, or upgrading of major defense equipment valued at $25 million or more, defense articles or services at $100 million or more, or design and construction services of $300 million or more. Congress reviews formal notifications pursuant to procedures in the AECA and has the authority to block a sale. To export a defense article through DCS, a U.S. defense firm must comply with ITAR requirements. The three Directorates of the State Department’s Bureau of Political-Military Affairs publish policy, issue licenses, and enforce compliance in accord with the ITAR in order to ensure commercial exports of defense articles and defense services advance U.S. national security and foreign policy objectives.63 If marketing efforts involve the disclosure of technical data or the temporary export of defense articles, the defense firm must also obtain the appropriate export license from DDTC.64 DOD’s Defense Technology Security Administration (DTSA) serves as a reviewing agency for the export licensing of dual-use commodities and munitions items and provides technical and policy assessments of export license applications. Specifically, it identifies and mitigates national security risks associated with the international transfer of critical information and advanced technology in order to maintain the U.S. military’s technological edge and to support U.S. national security objectives.65 The ITAR includes many exemptions from the licensing requirements. Some are self-executing by the exporting firm who is to use them and normally are based on prior authorizations. Other exemptions (for example, the exemption in 22 CFR 125.4(b)(1) regarding technical data) may be requested or directed by the supporting military department or DOD agency.66 62 CRS Report RL31675, Arms Sales: Congressional Review Process, by Paul K. Kerr. 63 https://www.pmddtc.state.gov//ddtc_public??id==ddtc_public_portal_homepage, accessed January 16, 2020. 64 DOD, SAMM, C3.3.1, at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-3#C3.3https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-3#C3.3. 65 https://www.dtsa.mil/SitePages/about-dtsa/mission-culture-history.aspx, accessed January 16, 2020, and https://www.dtsa.mil/SitePages/about-dtsa/510572p.pdf. DTSA serves as the focal point for development and implementation of DOD policy positions on matters concerning technology security transfer. 66 DOD, SAMM, C3.3.2. ITAR Exemptions, https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-3#C3.3.https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-3#C3.3. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 17 Figure 2. Direct Commercial Sales (DCS) Licensing Process in Comparison with FMS Source: Adapted from GAO, “Conventional Arms Transfer Policy: Agency Processes for Reviewing Direct Commercial Sales and Foreign Military Align With Policy Criteria,” GAO-19-673R, September 9, 2019. Annotated by CRS. DOD Role in DCS In contrast to FMS, DOD does not directly administer sales or facilitate transportation of items purchased under DCS, although, unless the host country requests that purchase be made through FMS, DOD tries to accommodate a U.S. defense firm’s preference for DCS, if articulated. In addition, DOD does not normally provide price quotes for comparison of FMS to DCS.67 If a company or country prefers that a sale be made commercially rather than via FMS, and when a company receives a request for proposal from a country and prefers DCS, the company may request that DSCA issue a DCS preference for that particular sale. The particulars of each recipient country, U.S. firm, and sale determine whether FMS or DCS is preferred. Before approving DCS preference for a specific transaction, DSCA considers the following:68  Items provided through blanket order and those required in conjunction with a system sale do not normally qualify for DCS preference. 67 DOD, SAMM, C2.1.8.6 , at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-2.https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-2. 68 DOD, SAMM, C.4.3.6., at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-4#C4.1.https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-4#C4.1. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 18  FMS procedures may be required in sales to certain countries and for sales financed with Military Assistance Program (MAP) funds or, in most cases, with FMF funds.  The DSCA Director may also recommend to the DOS that it mandate FMS for a specific sale.  DCS preferences are valid for one year; therefore, during this time, if the IA receives from the purchaser a request for pricing and availability (P&A) or an LOA for the same item, it should notify the purchaser of the DCS preference.69 U.S. firms may request defense articles and services from DOD to support a DCS to a foreign country or international organization.70 Defense articles must be provided pursuant to applicable statutory authority, including 22 U.S.C. 2770, which authorizes the sale of defense articles or defense services to U.S. companies at not less than their estimated replacement cost (or actual cost in the case of services). The SCO chief and other relevant members of the country team normally meet with visiting U.S. defense industry representatives regarding their experiences in country. The SCO chief responds to follow-up inquiries from industry representatives with respect to any reactions from host country officials or subsequent marketing efforts by foreign competitors. The SCO chief alerts embassy staff to observe reactions of the host country officials on U.S. defense industry marketing efforts. As appropriate, the SCO chief can pass these reactions to the U.S. industry representatives. However, the SCO may not work on behalf of any specific U.S. firm; its only preference can be for purchasers to “buy American.” If the SCO chief believes that a firm’s marketing efforts do not coincide with overall U.S. defense interests or have potential for damaging U.S. credibility and relations with the country, the SCO chief relays these concerns, along with a request for guidance, throughout the country team and to the Combatant Command, Military Department, and DSCA.71 Excess Defense Articles If a partner is unable to purchase, or wishes to avoid purchasing, a newly-manufactured U.S. defense article, it may request transfer of Excess Defense Articles from DOD to its designated recipient.72 EDA refers to DOD and United States Coast Guard (USCG)-owned defense articles that are no longer needed and, as a result, have been declared excess by the U.S. Armed Forces. This excess equipment is offered at reduced or no cost to eligible foreign recipients on an “as is, where is” basis.73 As such, EDA is a hybrid between sales and grant transfer programs. DOD 69 DOD, SAMM, C.4.3.6.1-3, at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-4#C4.1.https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-4#C4.1. 70 DOD, SAMM, C4.3.13, at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-4#C4.1.https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-4#C4.1. 71 DOD, SAMM, C2.1.8., at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-2#C2.1.https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-2#C2.1. 72 22 U.S.C. §2761, 22 U.S.C. §2321j, and 22 U.S.C. §2314 authorize sales and grants from DOD stocks. DSCA maintains a database of EDA at https://www.dsca.mil//programs//excess-defense-articles-eda, which is accessible to foreign partners interested in requesting items from SCOs. 73 DOD, SAMM, C11.3.1., at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-11#C11.3. In practice, this means the recipient must pay all refurbishment costs and transportation costs. In some cases, recipients may use FMF to open a transportation case that enables them to receive the EDA. The cost of refurbishment is often a deterrent to seeking EDA transfer. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 19 states that the EDA program works best in assisting friends and allies to augment current inventories of like items with a support structure already in place.74 All FMS eligible countries can request EDA. An EDA grant transfer to a country must be justified to Congress for the fiscal year in which the transfer is proposed as part of the annual congressional justification documents for military assistance programs.75 There is no guarantee that any EDA offer will be made on a grant basis; each EDA transfer is considered on a case-by-case basis.76 EDA grants or sales that contain significant military equipment or with an original acquisition cost of $7 million or more require a 30-calendar day congressional notification.77 Title to EDA items transfers at the point of origin, except for items located in Germany; those EDA items transfer title at the nearest point of debarkation outside of Germany. All purchasers or grant recipients must agree that they will not transfer title or possession of any defense article or related training or other defense services to any other country without prior consent from DOS pursuant to 22 U.S.C. §2753 and 22 U.S.C. §2314. Interagency Relationships in Arms Sales The decision-making and execution involved in a transfer of defense articles or services includes myriad stakeholders, from the President and Congress to small, two-person Security Cooperation Organizations in embassies around the world. Having granted to the President authority to carry out arms sales and exports, Congress oversees its conduct. In further delegation of authority, the Secretaries of State and Defense, through their departments, carry out functions outlined in statute, federal regulations, and executive orders. State Department Policy Prerogatives All security assistance programs are subject to the continuous supervision and general direction of the Secretary of State, to be consistent with U.S. foreign policy interests. DOS ensures partner and purchaser eligibility for arms transfer(s) and obtains required assurances from recipient countries and organizations.78The State Department also reviews and approves export license requests for direct commercial sales of items on the United States Munitions List. As mentioned above, DOS submits to Congress, in its Congressional Budget Justification, an annual estimate of the total amount of transfers expected to be made to each foreign nation and an annual arms sale proposal report (Javits Report) required by law.79 Within the State Department, the Bureau of Political-Military Affairs (PM) is the main administrator for arms transfers, whether FMS or DCS. PM provides policy direction for sale and export of defense articles related to international security, security assistance, military operations, defense strategy and plans, and defense trade.80 74 Ibid. 75 DOD, SAMM, C11.3.2.2, at https://samm.dsca.mil//chapter//chapter-11#C11.3. See also 22 U.S.C. §2321j. 76 DOD, SAMM, C11.3.2.2., at https://samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-11#C11.3. 77 22 USC §2321j(f)(1). 78 22 U.S.C. 2311; 22 U.S.C. 2314(a). 79 22 U.S.C. §2765(a)(2). 80 https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/under-secretary-for-arms-control-and-international-security-affairs/bureau-of-political-military-affairs/. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 20 Under PM, the Office of Regional Security and Arms Transfers (RSAT) manages the sale/transfer of U.S.-origin defense articles and services to foreign governments.81 PM/RSAT, which is responsible for ensuring that all FMS cases are properly reviewed within the State Department for consistency with U.S. foreign policy and national security objectives, receives all FMS cases from DSCA, DOD’s FMS implementing agency. PM/RSAT officers coordinate with other department bureaus and offices and provide recommendations to PM leadership on whether to approve potential FMS sales. Finally, PM/RSAT officers work with PM leadership and DOD to make the required notifications, to include briefing congressional staff on the Javits Report.82 Each U.S. embassy country team, under the direction of the State Department and led by the Chief of Mission (usually the U.S. Ambassador), prepares an Integrated Country Strategy (ICS) detailing mission plans for engagements with the host country, including defense education, training, arms transfers, and other cooperation. Within the country team, the senior defense official (SDO) directs the preparation of the defense cooperation portion of ICS. The embassy’s SCO (see footnote 41), normally called the Chief of the Office of Defense Cooperation (ODC Chief), annually forecasts and documents the budget for defense cooperation activities, based upon his or her own contacts with the host nation military and those of the SDO and other military stationed in-country. Both the SDO and ODC Chief work under the direct supervision of the Chief of Mission but report to, and are evaluated by, the geographic combatant command (COCOM) in the operational area where the host nation lies. They manage the delicate task of balancing the COCOM’s view of necessary security cooperation and capacity-building activities with relevant State Department officials’ views. The SDO and ODC Chief may submit their recommendations directly to both the Head of Mission and to the COCOM. Where there is a large ODC, with subordinate service representative offices, the service representatives may submit service-specific forecasts and budgets to their service and its implementing agency as well. The COCOM views may or may not be reflected in the mission’s ICS submission, as the Head of Mission ultimately decides what the mission will forward. Many countries that receive U.S.-made defense articles and services have organizations similar to an ODC in their embassies or consulates in the United States. They interact with both State Department and DOD officials, as well as U.S. defense contractors, to initiate and coordinate pre-LOR (for FMS) or pre-DCS actions. DOD Policy and Implementation Role Notwithstanding the primary role of the State Department, DOD plays a central role in shaping arms sales policy and implementing arms transfers (as noted in sections above outlining the processes for FMS and DCS). DOD Directive 5132.03 promulgates DOD Policy and Responsibilities Relating to Security Cooperation, based on the National Defense Strategy and the National Military Strategy.83 Within DOD security cooperation, the Theater Campaign Plan (TCP) balances U.S. government strategic imperatives with host nation military-to-military engagement. Each country section of the TCP identifies significant security cooperation initiatives planned for the country and articulates specific, measurable, attainable, relevant, and time-bound objectives in support of such 81 https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/under-secretary-for-arms-control-and-international-security-affairs/bureau-of-political-military-affairs/office-of-regional-security-and-arms-transfers/. 82 https://2009-2017.state.gov/t/pm/rsat/c14021.htm. 83 In effect, DOD’s system is a bottom-up defense and security cooperation planning method, starting with the recommendations from the SDO and ODC Chief. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 21 initiatives.84 The regional COCOM’s corresponding, subordinate country cooperation plans drive the specific transfers of defense articles and services, including major arms transfers and training events. The objectives set within these strategies take into account the host nation’s security environment, political will, willingness and ability to protect sensitive information and technologies, and absorptive capacity, as well as policy and legal constraints.85 The COCOM then passes its recommendations for FMS and EDA arms transfers to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and to the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD(P)) for inclusion in the integrated country strategy and the joint regional strategy; they also identify obstacles to execution of plans, including shortfalls in security cooperation authorities or resources, joint capability shortfalls, or shortfalls in partners’ capabilities.86 The CJCS is generally charged with providing military advice to the Secretary of Defense concerning security cooperation.87 The CJCS and the USD(P) are charged with developing and managing a process to address obstacles to campaign plan execution that the COCOMs identify.88 The office of the USD(P) is generally charged with representing DOD in security assistance and security cooperation matters, setting DOD’s security cooperation priorities, and harmonizing these within a whole-of-government approach to engagements with allied and partner nations.89 The one assistant charged purely with leading security cooperation is the Director of the Defense Security Cooperation Agency. Selected tasks of this officer, normally a 3-star general or flag officer, working directly for the USD (P), include  providing guidance to the DOD Components and DOD representatives to U.S. missions (i.e. senior defense officials) for the execution of DOD security cooperation programs;  managing and administering those Title 10 and 22 programs for which DSCA has responsibility, consistent with security cooperation priorities; and  coordinating the development of foreign disclosure and sales policies and procedures for defense information, technology, and systems (with the USD(P) and USD (Sustainment). In sum, DOD generally implement security cooperation programs on behalf of the Department of State, as part of broader foreign policy and national security strategies. Based on its authority under Title 22, the State Department must arbitrate among a large number stakeholders (e.g., partner nations, embassy country teams, COCOMs, Joint Staff and Office of the Secretary of Defense) and interests (e.g., economic gain for U.S. firms, technology security, long-term national security of the United States and its partners). 84 DOD Directive 5132.03, p.14, 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3. 85 DOD Directive 5132.03, p.14, 3.3.b. 86 DOD Directive 5132.03, p. 12, 2.14.i. 87 DOD Directive 5132.03, p. 11, 2.13.a. 88 DOD Directive 5132.03, p. 11, 2.13.f. 89 DOD Directive 5132.03, p. 5, 2.1. USD(P) or a delegate, in coordination with the USD(AT&L) or a delegate, co-chairs the Arms Transfer and Technology Release Senior Steering Group, in accordance with DoDD 5111.21 and directs the operation of the National Disclosure Policy Committee, in accordance with DoDD 5230.11. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 22 End-Use Monitoring (EUM) The Arms Export Control Act (AECA) directs the President to establish a program that provides for the end-use monitoring for all defense articles and defense services sold, leased, or exported under the act.90 The program is required to provide reasonable assurance that the recipient is complying with the requirements imposed by the U.S. government with respect to use, transfers, and security of the articles and services, as well as that such articles and services are being used for the purposes for which they were provided.91 The executive branch has two formal EUM programs: Blue Lantern is for Direct Commercial Sales, while Golden Sentry is for Foreign Military Sales. If exported defense articles require specialized physical security and accounting, the Golden Sentry program conducts specialized Enhanced EUM. State Department’s Blue Lantern Program (DCS) The State Department’s Directorate for Defense Trade Controls administers the Blue Lantern program for articles and services on the USML exported via DCS. According to DOS, it includes pre-license, post-license, and post-shipment checks to verify the bona fides of foreign country consignees and end users, as well as verifying the legitimacy of proposed transactions and the compliance with U.S. defense export rules and policies. Typically conducted by U.S. embassy and consular staff, verifications occur in over 100 countries every year. If the Blue Lantern check determines an unfavorable use, it may result in the denial or revocation of the export license, the violator’s entry on DDTC’s watch list, or referral to Homeland Security Investigations or the FBI.92 In FY2018, with 35,779 authorized DCS export license applications, DOS initiated 466 Blue Lantern checks (268 pre-license, 89 post-shipment, and 109 containing both pre-license and post-shipment checks) in over 70 countries. In the same year, DOS closed 585 Blue Lantern cases, with 168 labeled “unfavorable.”93 DOD’s Golden Sentry Program (FMS) The Defense Security Cooperation Agency administers DOD’s Golden Sentry program, which is the FMS counterpart of State’s Blue Lantern program. Golden Sentry’s objective is to ensure compliance with technology control requirements and to provide reasonable assurance that the recipients are complying with U.S. government requirements with respect to the use, transfer, and security of defense articles and services. The program includes actions to prevent misuse or unauthorized transfer of the articles or services from title transfer until disposal, with the type of article or service generally determining the level of monitoring required.94 In routine EUM, DOD’s Security Cooperation Organizations (SCOs) are required to observe and report any potential misuse or unapproved transfer of FMS articles or services to the regional 90 P.L. 90-629, Section 40A (22 U.S.C. §2785). 91 22 U.S.C. §2795. 92 Testimony of Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Political-Military Affairs Tina S. Kaidanow in U.S. Congress, House Subcommittee of Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade, Committee on Foreign Affairs, Foreign Military Sales: Process and Policy, June 15, 2017, https://docs.house.gov//meetings//FA//FA18//20170615//106129//HHRG-115-FA18-Transcript-20170615.pdf. 93 Department of State, “End-Use Monitoring of Defense Articles and Defense Services Commercial Exports FY 2018,” https://www.pmddtc.state.gov/sys_attachment.do?sysparm_referring_url=tear_off&view=true&sys_id=d53a84efdb9177045564ff1e0f961910. 94 DOD, SAMM, C8.2, at https://www.samm.dsca.mil/chapter/chapter-8. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 23 COCOM, DSCA, and the State Department. They must conduct their checks at least quarterly, and must document their checks in reporting to DSCA. In the case of arms, ammunition, and explosives, SCOs are required to apply the same standards of U.S. control to the items upon release to the purchaser.95 Enhanced EUM—Golden Sentry Some security-sensitive exported or transferred defense articles require specialized physical security and accounting. These items are designated as requiring Enhanced End-Use Monitoring (EEUM) by a military service’s export policy, or by interagency agreement, or through DOD policy resulting from consultation with Congress.96 The EEUM program is administered through Golden Sentry and requires DOD’s SCOs in-country to conduct planned and coordinated visits to host nation installations, where they verify by serial number each EEUM-designated item on an annual basis.97 Questions for Congressional Consideration Do Current Levels of Arms Sales and Exports Fulfill Statutory and Policy Objectives? Section 1 of the AECA states, “An ultimate goal of the United States continues to be a world which is free from the scourge of war and the dangers and burdens of armaments; in which the use of force has been subordinated to the rule of law; and in which international adjustments to a changing world are achieved peacefully. In furtherance of that goal, it remains the policy of the United States to encourage regional arms control and disarmament agreements and to discourage arms races.”98 The AECA proceeds to acknowledge and allow that arms transfers and cooperation are necessary to “maintain and foster the environment of international peace and security essential to social, economic, and political progress.”99 These two paragraphs appear to draw a distinction between the policy aims of arms production and transfer on the one hand and, on the other, the burden [emphasis added] thereof as separate from economic endeavor and progress. Current Administration policy contained in NSPM-10 is to “bolster the security of the United States and our allies and partners,” while preventing proliferation by exercising restraint and continuing to participate in multilateral nonproliferation arrangements such as the Missile Technology Control Regime and the Wassenaar Arrangement. It explicitly commits the U.S. government to continue to meet the requirements of all applicable statues, including the AECA, the FAA, the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, and the annual NDAAs. It also prioritizes efforts to “increase trade opportunities for United States companies, including by supporting United States industry with appropriate advocacy and trade promotion activities 95 Ibid. 96 Ibid. 97 Testimony of Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Political-Military Affairs Tina S. Kaidanow in U.S. Congress, House Subcommittee of Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade, Committee on Foreign Affairs, Foreign Military Sales: Process and Policy, June 15, 2017, https://docs.house.gov//meetings//FA//FA18//20170615//106129//HHRG-115-FA18-Transcript-20170615.pdf. 98 22 U.S.C. §2751. 99 Ibid. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 24 and by simplifying the United States regulatory environment.” The document adds “a dynamic defense industrial base” as a named employment source and stipulates “economic security” as a requirement for national security and defense.100 Congress may consider whether current sales and exports of defense articles and services, at current levels, bolster the security of the U.S. and its allies, while simultaneously fostering U.S. industry and innovation. Overall, should the goals of increasing trade opportunities for U.S. companies be an explicit goal of U.S. arms sales policy? In light of the potential differences between 10 U.S.C. §2151 and the current United States Conventional Arms Transfer Policy, Congress may consider  whether to reformulate the goals of the Arms Export Control Act in light of the contemporary national security situation,  whether and to what extent economic security comprises a facet of national security including any effect on the defense industrial base (DIB) and the national technical industrial base (NTIB),101 and  whether to determine the value of U.S. national arms production and export as part of overall U.S. exports and the degree to which desirability of arms production contributes to real long term economic growth. Are Current Methods of Conducting Sales of Defense Articles and Services Consistent with the Intent and Objectives of the AECA? In FY2018, foreign entities purchased $47.71 billion in FMS cases and the value of privately contracted DCS authorizations licensed by the State Department totaled $136.6 billion (see Table 1 and Table 2, above). Congress may consider if this amount of annual arms sales is consistent with the intent of statute governing these sales. The FAA expresses, as U.S. policy, “the efforts of the United States and other friendly countries to promote peace and security continue to require measures of support based upon the principle of effective self-help and mutual aid.”102 The AECA states that “all such sales be approved only when they are consistent with the foreign policy of the United States, the purposes of the foreign assistance program…, and the economic and financial capability of the recipient country, with particular regard being given, where appropriate, to proper balance among such sales, grant military assistance, and economic assistance as well as to the impact of the sales on programs of social and economic development and on existing or incipient arms races.”103 Section 1 of the AECA further limits U.S. arms sales, as policy, to levels extant when it was enacted: It is the sense of the Congress that the aggregate value of defense articles and defense services- 100 The White House, “National Security Presidential Memorandum Regarding U.S. Conventional Arms Transfer Policy,” April 19, 2018, https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/national-security-presidential-memorandum-regarding-u-s-conventional-arms-transfer-policy/. 101 For more information on the DIB see CRS In Focus IF10548, Defense Primer: U.S. Defense Industrial Base, by Heidi M. Peters. For more information on the NTIB see CRS In Focus IF11311, Defense Primer: The National Technology and Industrial Base, by Heidi M. Peters. 102 22 U.S.C. §2301. 103 22 U.S.C. §2751. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 25 (1) which are sold under section 2761 or section 2762 of this title; or (2) which are licensed or approved for export under section 2778 of this title to, for the use, or for benefit of the armed forces, police, intelligence, or other internal security forces of a foreign country or international organization under a commercial sales contract; in any fiscal year should not exceed current levels.104 Congress may consider whether and how it measures the relation between the 1976 level of arms sales and any contemporary level. Are End Use Monitoring Programs Resourced Adequately? Some critics of current EUM programs point to a potential disparity between the number of defense articles exported and the number of EUM investigations completed. For example, in the State Department’s Blue Sentry Program in FY2018, DDTC authorized 35,779 export license applications. DOS initiated 466 Blue Lantern checks (268 pre-license, 89 post-shipment, and 109 containing both pre-license and post-shipment checks) in over 70 countries. This represents approximately 1.3 percent of adjudicated license applications. The State Department employed five full-time employees and six contractors to administer the program.105 Some analysts have argued that such a small staff could not possibly track everything that happens to billions of dollars’ worth of defense articles transferred to dozens of foreign countries each year.106 Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Political-Military Affairs Tina Kaidanow testified that under current programs, there are a number of steps that the U.S government can take to endure proper end use of exported defense articles. She noted further that most U.S defense manufacturers are responsible for ensuring compliance with the ITAR, with personnel dedicated to ensuring such compliance while working closely with the State Department to address any compliance issues that may arise.107 104 22 U.S.C. §2751. 105 Department of State, “End-Use Monitoring of Defense Articles and Defense Services Commercial Exports FY 2018,” https://www.pmddtc.state.gov/sys_attachment.do?sysparm_referring_url=tear_off&view=true&sys_id=d53a84efdb9177045564ff1e0f961910 . 106 A. Trevor Thrall and Caroline Dorminey, Risky Business: The Role of Arms Sales in U.S. Foreign Policy, Cato Institute, March 13, 2018, https://www.cato.org/publications/policy-analysis/risky-business-role-arms-sales-us-foreign-policy. 107 Kaidanow testimony. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 26 Appendix. Selected Legislative Restrictions on Sales and Export of U.S. Defense Articles Since the enactment of the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) in 1961, Congress has amended both the FAA and the AECA, as well as Title 10 U.S.C. (governing DOD) in order to limit the sale and export of U.S. defense articles to certain foreign countries. Additional limitations have been enacted in the annual State/Foreign Operations and Related Programs Appropriations Acts, and through the National Defense Authorization Acts. The following illustrative examples are not intended to be comprehensive. Restrictions Based on Human Rights Violations108  Section 502B(a)(2) of the FAA (22 U.S.C. 2304(a)(2)) prohibits, absent the exercise of a presidential waiver, security assistance to any country where the government engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights. “Security assistance” is defined here to include “sales of defense articles or services, extensions of credits (including participations in credits), and guaranties of loans” under the AECA.109  The U.S. “Leahy Laws,” Section 620M of the FAA and 10 U.S.C. §362, prohibit U.S. security assistance to foreign security force units when credible evidence exists that the unit has committed a gross violation of human rights. However, these laws do not define security assistance, and in practice the executive branch applies them only to U.S.-funded transactions, excluding FMS or DCS.110  The Child Soldiers Prevention Act of 2008 (P.L. 110-547, 22 U.S.C §2370c-1), prohibits assistance to and licensing for direct commercial sales of military equipment to the government of a country that is clearly identified as having governmental armed forces, police, or other security forces, or government-supported armed groups, that recruit or use child soldiers.  The Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000, P.L. 106-386, amended Section 502B of the FAA to require that the President report to the Congress on countries found to be involved in extreme forms of trafficking of persons. The act prohibits nonhumanitarian and nontrade-related aid, including security assistance, to countries that do not comply with minimum standards for eliminating trafficking in persons, subject to presidential waiver. Restrictions on Countries Supporting Terrorism  Section 40 of the AECA (22 U.S.C. §2780) prohibits exporting or otherwise providing, directly or indirectly, any munitions item to a country whose government has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism. Section 40A (22 U.S.C. §2781) prohibits any defense article or defense service from being sold or licensed for export to any county the President determines is not cooperating fully with United States antiterrorism efforts. The prohibitions contained in this section do not apply with respect to any transaction subject to 108 See CRS In Focus IF11197, U.S. Arms Sales and Human Rights: Legislative Basis and Frequently Asked Questions, by Paul K. Kerr and Liana W. Rosen. 109 Section 502B(d)(2) of the FAA (22 U.S.C. 2304(d)(2)); Ibid. 110 Ibid. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service 27 reporting requirements under title V of the National Security Act of 1947, 50 U.S.C. §3091 et seq. Restrictions on the Process of Foreign Military Sales  Section 830 of the FY2017 National Defense Authorization Act, P.L. 114-328, required the Secretary of Defense to prescribe regulations to require the use of firm fixed-price contracts for Foreign Military Sales. Restrictions and Limitations on Specific Countries and Regions  Libya: Section 404 of the International Security and Cooperation Act of 1985, P.L. 99-83, which amended the FAA (22 U.S.C. §2439aa-8), authorized the President to prohibit any goods or technology, including technical data or other information, from being exported to Libya.  Middle East Countries, Excluding Israel: Section 36(h)(1) of the AECA, P.L. 90-629, 22 U.S.C §2776(h)(1), requires any certification relating to a proposed sale to Middle East countries, excluding Israel, to include a determination that the sale or export of the defense articles or defense services will not adversely affect Israel’s qualitative military edge over military threats to Israel.  West Bank and Gaza: Section 699 of the FY2003 Foreign Relations Authorization Act, P.L. 107-228, prohibits the sale of defense articles or defense services to any person or entity whom “the President determines, based on a preponderance of the evidence, … has knowingly transferred proscribed weapons to Palestinian entities in the West Bank or Gaza,” for two years after congressional notification.  Iraq: The FY2008 NDAA, Section 1228, P.L. 110-181, required the President to implement a policy to control the export and transfer of defense articles into Iraq, with no defense articles to be provided to the Government of Iraq until the President certified to Congress that a registration and monitoring system was in place.  Arab League Boycott of Israel: Section 564 of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1994 and 1995, P.L. 103-236, stated, “No defense article or defense service may be sold or leased by the United States Government to any country or international organization that, as a matter of policy or practice, is known to have sent letters to United States firms requesting compliance with, or soliciting information regarding compliance with, the Arab League secondary or tertiary boycott of Israel…”  Saudi Arabia and Kuwait: Section 104 of the Dire Emergency Supplemental Appropriations and Transfers for Relief from the Effects of Natural Disasters, for Other Urgent Needs, and for Incremental Costs of “Operation Desert Shield/Desert Storm” Act of 1992, P.L. 102-229, prohibited any funds appropriated in the act to conduct, support, or administer any sale of defense articles or defense services to Saudi Arabia or Kuwait until that country paid in full their commitments to the United States made during Operation Desert Shield/Storm. Transfer of Defense Articles: Sale and Export of U.S.-Made Arms to Foreign Entities Congressional Research Service R46337 · VERSION 2 · NEW 28 Restrictions on Defense Articles Related to Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Weapons The AECA has a series of provisions limiting the export of defense items related to nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons (22 U.S.C. §2799aa). Those controls are explained in detail in CRS Report R41916, The U.S. Export Control System and the Export Control Reform Initiative, by Ian F. Fergusson and Paul K. Kerr. Author Information Nathan J. Lucas Section Research Manager Michael J. Vassalotti Section Research Manager Acknowledgments This report is based on a number of years’ work in CRS, most notably by Richard Grimmett, then-Specialist in International Security. The report is also based upon CRS Report U.S. Military Sales and Assistance Programs: Laws, Regulations, and Procedures, written by Robert D. Shuey, then-Specialist in U.S. Foreign Policy and National Defense, July 23, 1985. Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 		2020-05-07T12:57:42-0400
Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program: Background and Issues for Congress Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program: Background and Issues for Congress Updated May 1, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov R41129 Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service Summary The Columbia (SSBN-826) class program is a program to design and build a class of 12 new ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs) to replace the Navy’s current force of 14 aging Ohio-class SSBNs. The Navy has identified the Columbia-class program as the Navy’s top priority program. The Navy wants to procure the first Columbia-class boat in FY2021. Research and development work on the program has been underway for several years, and advance procurement (AP) funding for the first boat began in FY2017. The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $2,891.5 million (i.e., about $2.9 billion) in procurement funding, $1,123.2 million (i.e., about $1.1 billion) in advance procurement (AP) funding, and $397.3 million in research and development funding for the program. The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates the procurement cost of the first Columbia-class boat at $14,393.4 million (i.e., about $14.4 billion) in then-year dollars, including $6,007.8 million (i.e., about $6.0 billion) in costs for plans, meaning (essentially) the detail design/non-recurring engineering (DD/NRE) costs for the Columbia class. (It is a longstanding Navy budgetary practice to incorporate the DD/NRE costs for a new class of ship into the total procurement cost of the first ship in the class.) Excluding costs for plans, the estimated hands-on construction cost of the first ship is $8,385.7 million (i.e., about $8.4 billion). The boat has received $6,227.8 million (i.e., about $6.2 billion) in prior-year AP funding. The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $2,891.5 million in procurement funding, and the remaining $5,274.2 million (i.e., about $5.3 billion) in procurement funding needed to complete the boat’s total estimated procurement cost of $14,393.4 million is to be requested in FY2022 and FY2023. The Navy wants to procure the second Columbia-class boat in FY2024. The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates the procurement cost of this boat at $9,326.1 million (i.e., about $9.3 billion) in then-year dollars. The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $1,123.2 million in AP funding for the Columbia-class program, of which $1,028.0 million (i.e., about $1.0 billion) is for the second boat and $95.2 million is for the third and subsequent boats in the program. The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates the total procurement cost of the 12-ship class at $109.8 billion in then-year dollars. Issues for Congress for the Columbia-class program include the following:  the risk—due to the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation, technical challenges, and/or funding-related issues— of a delay in designing and building the lead Columbia-class boat, which could put at risk the Navy’s ability to have the boat ready for its first scheduled deterrent patrol in 2031, when it is to deploy in the place of the first retiring Ohio-class SSBN;  whether the Navy has accurately priced the work it is proposing to do in the Columbia-class program in FY2021;  the risk of cost growth in the program;  the potential impact of the Columbia-class program on funding that will be available for other Navy programs, including other shipbuilding programs; and  potential industrial-base challenges of building both Columbia-class boats and Virginia-class attack submarines (SSNs) at the same time. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Background ..................................................................................................................................... 1 U.S. Navy SSBNs in General .................................................................................................... 1 Mission of SSBNs ............................................................................................................... 1 Current Ohio-Class SSBNs ................................................................................................. 2 U.S.-UK Cooperation on SLBMs and the New UK SSBN ................................................ 3 Submarine Construction Industrial Base ................................................................................... 4 Columbia-Class Program .......................................................................................................... 4 Navy’s Top Priority Program .............................................................................................. 4 Program Name .................................................................................................................... 5 Program Origin and Milestones .......................................................................................... 5 Planned Procurement Quantity and Schedule ..................................................................... 5 Columbia Class Design ....................................................................................................... 6 Tight Schedule for Designing and Build Lead Boat ........................................................... 7 Program Cost ...................................................................................................................... 7 National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund (NSBDF) ................................................................. 9 Integrated Enterprise Plan (IEP) ......................................................................................... 9 Cost-Plus Incentive Fee (CPIF) Block Buy Contract ....................................................... 10 FY2021-FY2025 Columbia-Class R&D and Procurement Funding ................................ 10 FY2021 Procurement Funding Request ............................................................................ 10 Issues for Congress ......................................................................................................................... 11 Risk of Schedule Delay in Designing and Building Lead Boat ............................................... 11 Overview ............................................................................................................................ 11 Risk Due to COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Situation .............................................................. 12 Risk Due to Technical Challenges .................................................................................... 13 Pricing of Proposed FY2021 Work ......................................................................................... 19 Risk of Cost Growth ................................................................................................................ 19 Overview ........................................................................................................................... 19 Navy Perspective .............................................................................................................. 20 CBO Perspective ............................................................................................................... 21 GAO Perspective .............................................................................................................. 22 Cost-Plus Incentive Fee (CPIF) Block Buy Contract ....................................................... 23 Program Affordability and Impact on Other Navy Shipbuilding Programs ............................ 23 Industrial-Base Challenges of Building Both Columbia- and Virginia-Class Boats ............... 25 Legislative Activity for FY2021 .................................................................................................... 27 Summary of Congressional Action on FY2021 Funding Request .......................................... 27 Figures Figure 1. Ohio (SSBN-726) Class SSBN ........................................................................................ 3 Figure 2. Columbia (SSBN-826) Class SSBN ................................................................................ 7 Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service Tables Table 1. Columbia-Class Program Funding ................................................................................... 11 Table 2. Navy Confidence Levels for Estimated Columbia-Class Unit Procurement Costs ......... 20 Table 3. Congressional Action on FY2021 Funding Request........................................................ 28 Table A-1. U.S. SSBN Classes ...................................................................................................... 29 Appendixes Appendix A. Summary of Past U.S. SSBN Designs ..................................................................... 29 Appendix B. U.S.-UK Cooperation on SLBMs and the New UK SSBN ..................................... 31 Appendix C. Columbia-Class Program Origin and Milestones .................................................... 34 Appendix D. Design of Columbia-Class Boats ............................................................................. 37 Appendix E. National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund (NSBDF) ...................................................... 46 Contacts Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 51 Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction This report provides background information and potential oversight issues for Congress on the Columbia-class program, a program to design and build a class of 12 new ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs) to replace the Navy’s current force of 14 aging Ohio-class SSBNs. The Navy has identified the Columbia-class program as the Navy’s top priority program. The Navy wants to procure the first Columbia-class boat in FY2021. The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $2,891.5 million in procurement funding, $1,123.2 million in advance procurement (AP) funding, and $397.3 million in research and development funding for the program. The program poses a number of funding and oversight issues for Congress. Decisions that Congress makes on the Columbia-class program could substantially affect U.S. military capabilities and funding requirements, and the U.S. shipbuilding industrial base. For an overview of the strategic and budgetary context in which the Columbia-class program and other Navy shipbuilding programs may be considered, see CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. This report focuses on the Columbia-class program as a Navy shipbuilding program. Another CRS report—CRS Report RL33640, U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues, by Amy F. Woolf—discusses the Columbia class as an element of future U.S. strategic nuclear forces in the context of strategic nuclear arms modernization efforts and arms control agreements. Background U.S. Navy SSBNs in General Mission of SSBNs The U.S. Navy operates three kinds of submarines—nuclear-powered attack submarines (SSNs), nuclear-powered cruise missile submarines (SSGNs), and nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs).1 The SSNs and SSGNs are multi-mission ships that perform a variety of peacetime and wartime missions.2 They do not carry nuclear weapons.3 1 In the designations SSN, SSGN, and SSBN, the SS stands for submarine, N stands for nuclear-powered (meaning the ship is powered by a nuclear reactor), G stands for guided missile (such as a cruise missile), B stands for ballistic missile. As shown by the “Ns” in SSN, SSGN, and SSBN, all U.S. Navy submarines are nuclear-powered. Other navies operate nonnuclear powered submarines, which are powered by energy sources such as diesel engines. A submarine’s use of nuclear or nonnuclear power as its energy source is not an indication of whether it is armed with nuclear weapons—a nuclear-powered submarine can lack nuclear weapons, and a nonnuclear-powered submarine can be armed with nuclear weapons. 2 For more on the Navy’s SSNs and SSGNs, see CRS Report RL32418, Navy Virginia (SSN-774) Class Attack Submarine Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke, and CRS Report RS21007, Navy Trident Submarine Conversion (SSGN) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 3 The Navy’s nonstrategic nuclear weapons—meaning all of the service’s nuclear weapons other than submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs)—were removed from Navy surface ships and submarines under a unilateral U.S. nuclear initiative announced by President George H. W. Bush in September 1991. The initiative reserved a right to rearm SSNs with nuclear-armed cruise missiles at some point in the future should conditions warrant. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 2 The SSBNs, in contrast, perform a specialized mission of strategic nuclear deterrence. To perform this mission, SSBNs are armed with submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs), which are large, long-range missiles armed with multiple nuclear warheads. SSBNs launch their SLBMs from large-diameter vertical launch tubes located in the middle section of the boat.4 The SSBNs’ basic mission is to remain hidden at sea with their SLBMs, so as to deter a nuclear attack on the United States by another country by demonstrating to other countries that the United States has an assured second-strike capability, meaning a survivable system for carrying out a retaliatory nuclear attack. Navy SSBNs, which are sometimes referred to informally as “boomers,”5 form one leg of the U.S. strategic nuclear deterrent force, or “triad,” which also includes land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and land-based long-range bombers. At any given moment, some of the Navy’s SSBNs are conducting nuclear deterrent patrols. The Department of Defense’s (DOD’s) report on the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review (NPR), released on February 2, 2018, states the following: Ballistic missile submarines are the most survivable leg of the triad. When on patrol, SSBNs are, at present, virtually undetectable, and there are no known, near-term credible threats to the survivability of the SSBN force. Nevertheless, we will continue to hedge against the possibility that advances in anti-submarine warfare could make the SSBN force less survivable in the future.6 Current Ohio-Class SSBNs The Navy currently operates 14 Ohio (SSBN-726) class SSBNs (see Figure 1). The boats are commonly called Trident SSBNs or simply Tridents because they carry Trident D-5 SLBMs. They were procured in FY1977-FY1991 and entered service in 1984-1997. They were designed and built by General Dynamics’ Electric Boat Division (GD/EB) of Groton, CT, and Quonset Point, RI. They were originally designed for 30-year service lives but were later certified for 42-year service lives, consisting of two approximately 19-year periods of operation separated by an approximately 4-year midlife nuclear refueling overhaul, called an engineered refueling overhaul (ERO). The nuclear refueling overhaul includes both a nuclear refueling and overhaul work on the ship that is not related to the nuclear refueling.7 The boats were originally designed to each carry 24 SLBMs. As part of DOD’s plan for complying with U.S.-Russia strategic nuclear arms control limits, four SLBM launch tubes on each boat have been deactivated, reducing to 20 the number of SLBMs they can each carry. 4 SSBNs, like other Navy submarines, are also equipped with horizontal torpedo tubes in the bow for firing torpedoes or other torpedo-sized weapons. 5 This informal name is a reference to the large boom that would be made by the detonation of an SLBM nuclear warhead. 6 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review 2018, released February 2, 2018, pp. 44-45. 7 A total of 18 Ohio-class SSBNs were procured in FY1974-FY1991. The ships entered service in 1981-1997. The first eight boats in the class were originally armed with Trident I C-4 SLBMs; the final ten were armed with larger and more-capable Trident II D-5 SLBMs. The Clinton Administration’s 1994 Nuclear Posture Review (NPR) recommended a strategic nuclear force for the START II strategic nuclear arms reduction treaty that included 14 Ohio-class SSBNs, all armed with D-5s. This recommendation prompted interest in the idea of converting the first four Ohio-class boats (SSBNs 726-729) into SSGNs, so as to make good use of the 20 years of potential operational life remaining in these four boats, and to bolster the U.S. SSN fleet. The first 4 Ohio-class boats were converted into SSGNs in 2002-2008, and the next four (SSBNs 730-733) were backfitted with D-5 SLBMs in 2000-2005, producing the current force of 14 Ohio-class SSBNs, all of which are armed with D-5 SLBMs. For more on the SSGN conversion program, see CRS Report RS21007, Navy Trident Submarine Conversion (SSGN) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 3 Eight of the 14 Ohio-class SSBNs are homeported at Bangor, WA, in Puget Sound; the other six are homeported at Kings Bay, GA, close to the Florida border. Unlike most Navy ships, which are operated by single crews, Navy SSBNs are operated by alternating crews (called the Blue and Gold crews) so as to maximize the percentage of time that they spend at sea in deployed status. Figure 1. Ohio (SSBN-726) Class SSBN With the hatches to some of its SLBM launch tubes open Source: U.S. Navy file photo accessed by CRS on February 24, 2011, at http://www.navy.mil/management/photodb/photos/101029-N-1325N-005.jpg. The first of the 14 Ohio-class SSBNs (SSBN-730) will reach the end of its 42-year service life in 2027. The remaining 13 will reach the ends of their service lives at a rate of roughly one ship per year thereafter, with the 14th reaching the end of its service life in 2040. The Navy has initiated a program to refurbish and extend the service lives of D-5 SLBMs to about 2040. As Columbia-class SSBNs begin to replace Ohio-class boats in 2031, refurbished D-5s carried by retiring Ohio-class boats will be transferred to new Columbia-class boats. Columbia-class boats will continue to be armed with these refurbished D-5s until about 2040, at which time the D-5s are to be replaced by a successor SLBM. Including the Ohio class, the Navy has operated four classes of SSBNs since 1959. For a table summarizing these four classes, see Appendix A. U.S.-UK Cooperation on SLBMs and the New UK SSBN As one expression of U.S.-UK cooperation on nuclear weapon matters that dates back to World War II, the UK’s four Vanguard-class SSBNs, which entered service in 1993-1999, each carry 16 Trident II D-5 SLBMs, and previous classes of UK SSBNs similarly carried earlier-generation U.S. SLBMs.8 The UK plans to replace the four Vanguard-class boats with three or four Dreadnought-class next-generation SSBNs. Dreadnought-class boats are to be equipped with 12 missile launch tubes, but current UK plans call for each boat to carry eight D-5 SLBMs, with the other four tubes not being used for SLBMs. The United States is providing technical assistance to 8 Although the SLBMs on UK SSBNs are U.S.-made, the nuclear warheads on the missiles are of UK design and manufacture. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 4 the United Kingdom for the Dreadnought-class program, as it has over the years for some other UK submarine programs; for additional discussion, see Appendix B. Submarine Construction Industrial Base U.S. Navy submarines are built at two shipyards—General Dynamics’ Electric Boat Division (GD/EB) of Groton, CT, and Quonset Point, RI, and Huntington Ingalls Industries’ Newport News Shipbuilding (HII/NNS), of Newport News, VA. GD/EB and HII/NNS are the only two shipyards in the country capable of building nuclear-powered ships. GD/EB builds submarines only, while HII/NNS also builds nuclear-powered aircraft carriers and is capable of building other types of surface ships. The two yards currently are jointly building Virginia-class attack submarines.9 In addition to GD/EB and HII/NNS, the submarine construction industrial base includes hundreds of supplier firms, as well as laboratories and research facilities, in numerous states. Much of the total material procured from supplier firms for the construction of submarines comes from sole-source suppliers. For nuclear-propulsion component suppliers, an additional source of stabilizing work is the Navy’s nuclear-powered aircraft carrier construction program.10 Much of the design and engineering portion of the submarine construction industrial base is resident at GD/EB. Smaller portions are resident at HII/NNS and some of the component makers. Columbia-Class Program Navy’s Top Priority Program Navy officials have stated consistently since September 2013 that the Columbia-class program is the Navy’s top priority program, and that this means, among other things, that from the Navy’s perspective, the Columbia-class program will be funded, even if that comes at the expense of funding for other Navy programs.11 9 For more on the arrangement for jointly building Virginia-class boats, see CRS Report RL32418, Navy Virginia (SSN-774) Class Attack Submarine Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 10 For more on this program, see CRS Report RS20643, Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. In terms of work provided to nuclear-propulsion component suppliers, a carrier nuclear propulsion plant is roughly equivalent to five submarine propulsion plants. 11 On September 18, 2013, Admiral Jonathan Greenert, then-Chief of Naval Operations, testified that the Columbia-class program “is the top priority program for the Navy.” (Statement of Admiral Jonathan Greenert, U.S. Navy, Chief of Naval Operations, Before the House Armed Services Committee on Planning for Sequestration in FY 2014 and Perspectives of the Military Services on the Strategic Choices and Management Review, September 18, 2013, p. 10.) Navy officials since then have reiterated this statement on numerous occasions. At a September 12, 2013, hearing before the Seapower and Projection Forces subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee on undersea warfare, a Navy official stated the following: The CNO has stated, his number one priority as the chief of Naval operations, is our—our strategic deterrent—our nuclear strategic deterrent. That will trump all other vitally important requirements within our Navy, but if there’s only one thing that we do with our ship building account, we—we are committed to sustaining a two ocean national strategic deterrent that protects our homeland from nuclear attack, from other major war aggression and also access and extended deterrent for our allies. (Transcript of hearing. (Spoken remarks of Rear Admiral Richard Breckenridge. The other witness at the hearing was Rear Admiral David Johnson.) Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 5 Program Name Until 2016, the Columbia-class program was known as the Ohio replacement program (ORP) or SSBN(X) program,12 and boats in the class were referred to as Ohio replacement boats or SSBNXs. Some budget documents continue to use these terms. Program Origin and Milestones For information on the Columbia-class program’s origin and milestones, see Appendix C. Planned Procurement Quantity and Schedule Planned Procurement Quantity Navy plans call for procuring 12 Columbia-class boats to replace the current force of 14 Ohio-class SSBNs. In explaining the planned procurement quantity of 12 boats, the Navy states the following:  Ten operational SSBNs—meaning boats not encumbered by lengthy maintenance actions—are needed to meet strategic nuclear deterrence requirements for having a certain number of SSBNs at sea at any given moment.  Fourteen Ohio-class boats were needed to meet the requirement for 10 operational boats because, during the middle years of the Ohio class life cycle, three and sometimes four of the boats were nonoperational at any given moment on account of being in the midst of lengthy midlife nuclear refueling overhauls or other extended maintenance actions.  Twelve (rather than 14) Columbia-class boats will be needed to meet the requirement for 10 operational boats because the midlife overhauls of Columbia-class boats, which will not include a nuclear refueling, will require less time (about two years) than the midlife refueling overhauls of Ohio-class boats (which require about four years from contract award to delivery), the result being that only two Columbia-class boats (rather than three or sometimes four) will be in the midst of midlife overhauls or other extended maintenance actions at any given moment during the middle years of the Columbia-class life cycle.13 The Trump Administration’s Nuclear Posture Review (NPR), released in February 2018, states the following: “The COLUMBIA-class program will deliver a minimum of 12 SSBNs to replace the current OHIO fleet and is designed to provide required capabilities for decades.”14 The use of the word “minimum” in that sentence can be viewed as signaling a possibility that the required 12 In the designation SSBN(X), the (X) meant that the design of the boat had not yet been determined. 13 For additional discussion, see “Navy Responds to Debate Over the Size of the SSBN Force,” Navy Live, May 16, 2013, accessed July 26, 2013, at http://navylive.dodlive.mil/2013/05/16/navy-responds-to-debate-over-the-size-of-the-ssbn-force/, and Richard Breckenridge, “SSBN Force Level Requirements: It’s Simply a Matter of Geography,” Navy Live, July 19, 2013, accessed July 26, 2013, at http://navylive.dodlive.mil/2013/07/19/ssbn-force-level-requirements-its-simply-a-matter-of-geography/. 14 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review 2018, released February 2, 2018, p. 49. A similar statement (which differs only in saying “COLUMBIA program” rather than “COLUMBIA-class program”) appears on p. x. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 6 number of Columbia-class boats might at some point be increased to something more than 12 boats.15 Planned Procurement Schedule The Navy wants to procure the first Columbia-class boat in FY2021, the second in FY2024, and the remaining 10 at a rate of one per year from FY2026 through FY2035. Under this schedule, the Navy projects that the lead boat (i.e., first boat) would be delivered in FY2028, the second in FY2031, and the remaining 10 at a rate of one per year from FY2033 through FY2042. After being delivered in FY2028, the lead boat would undergo substantial testing, with the aim of having it be ready for its first deterrent patrol in 2031. Under this schedule, and given planned retirement dates for Ohio-class boats, the Navy projects that the SSBN force would decline to 13 boats in FY2027-FY2028, 12 boats in FY2029, 11 boats in FY2030-FY2036 and 10 boats in FY2037-FY2040, and then increase back to 11 boats in FY2041 and 12 boats in FY2042.16 The Navy states that the reduction to 11 or 10 boats during the period FY2030-FY2041 is acceptable in terms of meeting strategic nuclear deterrence requirements, because during these years, all 11 or 10 of the SSBNs in service will be operational (i.e., none of them will be in the midst of a lengthy midlife overhaul). The Navy acknowledges that there is some risk in having the SSBN force drop to 11 or 10 boats, because it provides little margin for absorbing an unforeseen event that might force an SSBN into an unscheduled and lengthy maintenance action. The projected minimum level of 11 or 10 boats can be increased to 12 or 11 boats (providing some additional margin for absorbing an unforeseen event that might force an SSBN into an unscheduled and lengthy maintenance action) by accelerating by about one year the planned procurement dates of boats 2 through 12 in the program. Under this option, the second boat in the program would be procured in FY2023 rather than FY2024, the third boat in the program would be procured in FY2025 rather than FY2026, and so on. Implementing this option could affect the Navy’s plan for funding the procurement of other Navy shipbuilding programs during the period FY2022-FY2025. Columbia Class Design The Columbia-class design (see Figure 2) includes 16 SLBM tubes, as opposed to 24 SLBM tubes (of which 20 are now used for SLBMs) on Ohio-class SSBNs. Although the Columbia-class design has fewer SLBM tubes than the Ohio-class design, it is larger than the Ohio-class design in terms of submerged displacement. The Columbia-class design, like the Ohio-class design before it, will be the largest submarine ever built by the United States. For additional background information on the Columbia-class design, see Appendix D. Current U.S. and UK plans call for the Columbia class and the UK’s Dreadnought-class SSBN to use a missile compartment—the middle section of the boat with the SLBM launch tubes—of the same general design.17 As mentioned earlier, Dreadnought-class SSBNs are to each be armed with 15 See, for example, Marc Selinger, “Navy Might Someday Consider Buying More Than 12 Columbia-Class Submarines,” Defense Daily, April 12, 2018: 2-3. 16 Source: U.S. Navy, Report to Congress on the Annual Long-Range Plan for Construction of Naval Vessels for Fiscal Year 2019, February 2018, Tables A3-1 through A3-4 on p. 12. 17 Statement of Rear Admiral Stephen Johnson, USN, Director, Strategic Systems Programs, Before the Subcommittee on Strategic Forces of the Senate Armed Services Committee [on] FY2011 Strategic Systems, March 17, 2010, p. 6, which states the following: “The OHIO Replacement programs includes the development of a common missile Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 7 eight D-5 SLBMs, or half the number to be carried by the Columbia class. The modular design of the CMC will accommodate this difference. The UK provided some of the funding for the design of the CMC, including a large portion of the initial funding.18 Figure 2. Columbia (SSBN-826) Class SSBN Notional cutaway illustration Source: Detail of slide 2, entitled “OHIO Replacement Program System Description,” in Navy briefing on Columbia-class program presented by Captain William J. Brougham, Program Manager of PMS 397 (i.e., Project Manager Shipbuilding, Office Code 397, the office for the Columbia-class program), at the Sea, Air, and Space Symposium, April 8, 2014, posted at InsideDefense.com (subscription required), April 9, 2014. Tight Schedule for Designing and Build Lead Boat The schedule for designing and building the lead Columbia-class boat and having it ready for its scheduled first deterrent patrol in 2031 has little slack for absorbing unforeseen delays due to technical challenges or funding-related issues. A delay in designing and building the lead boat could put at risk the Navy’s ability to have the boat ready for its first scheduled deterrent patrol in 2031, when it is to deploy in the place of the first retiring Ohio-class SSBN. The tightness in the lead boat’s design and construction schedule has been a principal feature of the program (along with the program’s high priority) for several years. Much of the management time and attention that the Navy devotes to the program is focused on anticipating, monitoring, and mitigating risks to the lead boat’s construction schedule, so as to ensure that the schedule will be executed without significant delay. Program Cost Program Acquisition Cost Estimates of the procurement cost or acquisition cost (i.e., the research and development cost plus procurement cost) of the Columbia-class program include the following:  The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates the total procurement cost of the 12-ship class at $109.8 billion in then-year dollars.  The Navy in August 2017 estimated the total procurement cost of the Columbia-class program at $109.2 billion in then-year dollars and the program’s research and development cost at $13.0 billion in then-year dollars, for a total acquisition compartment that will support both the OHIO Class Replacement and the successor to the UK Vanguard Class.” 18 See Government Accountability Office, Defense Acquisitions[:] Assessments of Selected Weapon Programs, GAO-10-388SP, March 2010, p. 152; Government Accountability Office, Defense Acquisitions[:] Assessments of Selected Weapon Programs, GAO-11-233SP, March 2011, p. 147; Sam LaGrone and Richard Scott, “Deterrent Decisions: US and UK Wait on Next Steps for SSBN Replacements,” Jane’s Navy International, May 2010, pp. 10-11.) Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 8 (research and development plus procurement) cost of $122.3 billion in then-year dollars.19  The Navy as of January 2017 estimated the procurement cost of the lead ship in the Columbia class at $8.2 billion in constant 2017 dollars, not including several billion dollars in additional cost for plans for the class, and the average unit procurement cost of ships 2 through 12 in the program at $6.5 billion each in constant FY2017 dollars.20  A May 2019 Government Accountability Office (GAO) report assessing selected major DOD weapon acquisition programs stated that the estimated total acquisition (development plus procurement) cost of the Columbia-class program as of June 2018 was $103,035.2 million (about $103.0 billion) in constant FY2019 dollars, including $13,103.0 million (about $13.1 billion) in research and development costs and $89,932.2 million (about $89.9 billion) in procurement costs.21 The above estimates do not include estimated costs for refurbishing D-5 SLBMs so as to extend their service lives to about 2040. First Boat and Second Boat Procurement Costs The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates the procurement cost of the first Columbia-class boat at $14,393.4 million (i.e., about $14.4 billion) in then-year dollars, including $6,007.8 million (i.e., about $6.0 billion) in costs for plans, meaning (essentially) the detail design/non-recurring engineering (DD/NRE) costs for the Columbia class. (It is a longstanding Navy budgetary practice to incorporate the DD/NRE costs for a new class of ship into the total procurement cost of the first ship in the class.) Excluding costs for plans, the estimated hands-on construction cost of the first ship is $8,385.7 million (i.e., about $8.4 billion). The Navy wants to procure the second Columbia-class boat in FY2024. The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates the procurement cost of this boat at $9,326.1 million (i.e., about $9.3 billion) in then-year dollars. 19 Source: Navy briefing to CRS and CBO on the Columbia-class program, August 1, 2017. The Navy’s FY2019 budget submission, submitted in February 2018, estimates the total procurement cost of 12 Columbia-class boats at $109.0 billion in then-year dollars. 20 Columbia Class MS [Milestone] B, Congressional Notification, January 6, 2017, p. 1. The Navy in February 2010 preliminarily estimated the procurement cost of each Columbia-class boat at $6 billion to $7 billion in FY2010 dollars. (Source: U.S. Navy, Report to Congress on Annual Long-Range Plan for Construction of Naval Vessels for FY 2011, February 2010, p. 20.) Following the Columbia-class program’s December 9, 2010, Milestone A acquisition review meeting (see Appendix C), DOD issued an Acquisition Decision Memorandum (ADM) that, among other things, established a target average unit procurement cost for boats 2 through 12 in the program of $4.9 billion in constant FY2010 dollars. (Christopher J. Castelli, “DOD: New Nuclear Subs Will Cost $347 Billion To Acquire, Operate,” Inside the Navy, February 21, 2011; Elaine M. Grossman, “Future U.S. Nuclear-Armed Vessel to Use Attack-Submarine Technology,” Global Security Newswire, February 24, 2011; Jason Sherman, “Navy Working To Cut $7.7 Billion From Ohio Replacement Program,” Inside the Navy, February 28, 2011. See also Christopher J. Castelli, “DOD Puts ‘Should-Cost’ Pressure On Major Weapons Programs,” Inside the Navy, May 2, 2011.) 21 Government Accountability Office, Weapon Systems Annual Assessment[:] Limited Use of Knowledge-Based Practices Continues to Undercut DOD’s Investments, GAO-19-336SP, May 2019, p. 123. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 9 Operation and Support (O&S) Cost The Navy as of January 2017 estimated the average annual operation and support (O&S) cost of each Columbia class boat at $119 million per year.22 National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund (NSBDF) The National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund (NSBDF) is a fund in DOD’s budget separate from the Navy’s shipbuilding account for holding and executing procurement funding for the construction of new SSBNs. It was created by Congress in 2014 originally with the aim of helping to financially insulate other Navy shipbuilding programs from the potential cost impact of the Columbia-class program, and to encourage U.S. policymakers to finance the procurement of Columbia-class boats from across DOD’s budget rather than solely from the Navy’s budget. In more recent years, the statute establishing and governing the fund (10 U.SC. 2218a) has been amended to give the NSBDF an additional function of acting as a vehicle or repository for certain special acquisition authorities that have the potential for reducing at the margin the cost of Columbia-class boats and other Navy nuclear-powered ships (i.e., aircraft carriers and attack submarines). For additional background information on the NSBDF, see Appendix E. Integrated Enterprise Plan (IEP) The Navy, under a plan it calls the Integrated Enterprise Plan (IEP), plans to build Columbia-class boats jointly at GD/EB and HII/NNS, with most of the work going to GD/EB. (The IEP was previously called the Submarine Unified Build Strategy, or SUBS.) As part of this plan, the Navy is also proposing to adjust the division of work on the Virginia-class attack submarine program (in which boats are jointly built at GD/EB and HII/NNS),23 so that HII/NNS would receive a larger share of the final-assembly work for that program than it has received in the past.24 22 Columbia Class MS [Milestone] B, Congressional Notification, January 6, 2017, p. 1. 23 For more on the arrangement for jointly building Virginia-class boats, see CRS Report RL32418, Navy Virginia (SSN-774) Class Attack Submarine Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 24 Key elements of the Navy’s proposed plan include the following: • GD/EB is to be the prime contractor for designing and building Columbia-class boats; • HII/NNS is to be a subcontractor for designing and building Columbia-class boats; • GD/EB is to build certain parts of each Columbia-class boat—parts that are more or less analogous to the parts that GD/EB builds for each Virginia-class attack submarine; • HII/NNS is to build certain other parts of each Columbia-class boat—parts that are more or less analogous to the parts that HII/NNS builds for each Virginia-class attack submarine; • GD/EB is to perform the final assembly on all 12 Columbia-class boats; • as a result of the three previous points, the Navy estimates that GD/EB would receive an estimated 77%-78% of the shipyard work building Columbia-class boats, and HII/NNS would receive 22%-23%; • GD/EB is to continue as prime contractor for the Virginia-class program, but to help balance out projected submarine-construction workloads at GD/EB and HII/NNS, the division of work between the two yards for building Virginia-class boats is to be adjusted so that HII/NNS would perform the final assembly on a greater number of Virginia-class boats than it would have under a continuation of the current Virginia-class division of work (in which final assemblies are divided more or less evenly between the two shipyards); as a consequence, HII/NNS would receive a greater share of the total work in building Virginia-class boats than it would have under a continuation of the current division of work. See Julia Bergman, “Congressmen Visit EB A Day After It Is Named Prime Contractor for Ohio Replacement Program,” The Day (New London), March 29, 2016; Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “Ohio Replacement Plan Is Good News For Electric Boat,” Breaking Defense, March 29, 2016; Robert McCabe, “Newport News Shipbuilding’s Share of Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 10 Cost-Plus Incentive Fee (CPIF) Block Buy Contract The Navy intends to use a cost-plus incentive fee (CPIF) block buy contract25 to procure the first two ships in the class. A November 13, 2019, press report states The Navy will spend the next year negotiating a contract for the first two hulls in the Columbia-class ballistic missile submarine program, in a strategy that would get the first two boats on contract and under construction quickly and then insert cost-saving lessons learned into later ships. Rear Adm. Scott Pappano, the program executive officer for Columbia, said last week that the request for proposals for the first two hulls is out and that his PEO and its industry partners were in negotiations to get a contract in place before October 2020. “The contract needs to be in place in [Fiscal Year 2021] so that we can get construction rolling and meet that FY ‘27 delivery,” he said while addressing the Naval Submarine League’s annual symposium. Asked by USNI News after his presentation about the two-submarine RFP [Request for Proposals], Pappano said, “the thought process is, we wanted to get as much work in there as we can. It’s designed to be a cost-plus-incentive-fee contract, and the reason why we picked two ships was because as we work the first ship, any lessons learned on the first ship aren’t going to roll into, there’s not going to be enough time to roll into the second ship as they overlap. “So the thought process is, contract those two ships under one contract, a cost-plus contract, and then use lessons learned from that to do fixed-price contracting for hulls 3 and beyond,” he continued. Pappano added that the lead ship will inherently have more cost risk, but he believes the Navy will be in a good spot to move to a fixed-price contract by the third boat in the production line.26 FY2021-FY2025 Columbia-Class R&D and Procurement Funding Table 1 shows FY2021-FY2025 funding for the Columbia-class program under the Navy’s FY2020 budget submission. FY2021 Procurement Funding Request The first Columbia-class boat has received $6,227.8 million (i.e., about $6.2 billion) in prior-year AP funding. The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $2,891.5 million in procurement Virginia-Class Submarine Deliveries to Grow,” Virginian-Pilot (Newport News), March 29, 2016; Valerie Insinna, “GD Electric Boat Chosen To Take Lead Role for Ohio Replacement Sub,” Defense Daily, March 30, 2016: 1-3; Hugh Lessig, “Navy: More Submarine Work Coming to Newport News Shipyard,” Military.com, March 30, 2016; Lee Hudson, “Work on Ohio-Class Replacement Will Be 80-20 Split Between GDEB, HII-NNS,” Inside the Navy, April 4, 2016. See also Richard R. Burgess, “Submarine Admirals: ‘Unified Build Strategy’ Seeks Affordability for Future Sub Fleet,” Seapower, July 8, 2016. See also Statement of the Honorable Sean J. Stackley, Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and Acquisition), and Vice Admiral Joseph P. Mulloy, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Integration of Capabilities and Resources, and Lieutenant General Robert S. Walsh, Deputy Commandant, Combat Development and Integration & Commanding General, Marine Corps Combat Development Command, before the Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces of the House Armed Services Committee on Department of the Navy Seapower and Projection Forces Capabilities, February 25, 2016, p. 12. 25 For more on block buy contracting, see CRS Report R41909, Multiyear Procurement (MYP) and Block Buy Contracting in Defense Acquisition: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke and Moshe Schwartz. 26 Megan Eckstein, “First 2 Columbia SSBNs Will Have Cost-Plus Contract; Remaining Subs Will Be Fixed-Price,” USNI News, November 13, 2019. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 11 funding, and the remaining $5,274.2 million (i.e., about $5.3 billion) in procurement funding needed to complete the boat’s total estimated procurement cost of $14,393.4 million is to be requested in FY2022 and FY2023. The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget also requests $1,123.2 million in advance procurement (AP) funding for the Columbia-class program, of which $1,028.0 million (i.e., about $1.0 billion) is for the second boat and $95.2 million is for the third and subsequent boats in the program. Table 1. Columbia-Class Program Funding (Millions of then-year dollars, rounded to nearest tenth; totals may not add due to rounding) FY21 (req.) FY22 (proj.) FY23 (proj.) FY24 (proj.) FY25 (proj.) Department of Defense (DOD) funding Research and development (R&D) funding PE0603570N (line 047)/Project 3219 80.1 60.1 56.8 54.4 44.4 PE0603595N (line 052)/Project 3220 317.2 195.8 103.8 117.6 118.2 Subtotal R&D funding 397.3 255.9 160.6 172.0 162.6 Procurement funding Procurement 2,891.5 2,767.7 2,506.5 2,992.8 3,347.8 Advance procurement (AP) 1,123.2 1,229.0 1,643.7 2,211.2 2,760.2 Subtotal procurement funding 4,014.7 3,996.7 4,150.2 5,204.1 6,107.9 TOTAL R&D and procurement 4,412.0 4,252.6 4,310.8 5,376.1 6,270.5 Department of Energy (DOE) funding Naval Reactors—Columbia-class reactor systems development 64.7 55.0 53.9 52.9 45.6 Source: Table prepared by CRS based on Navy and Department of Energy FY2021 budget submissions. Notes: PE means Program Element, that is, a research and development line item. A Program Element may include several projects. PE0603570N/Project 3219 is the SSBN(X) reactor plant project within the PE for Advanced Nuclear Power Systems. PE0603595N/Project 3220 is the Sea-Based Strategic Deterrent (SBSD) Advanced Submarine System Development project within the PE for Ohio Replacement. Issues for Congress Risk of Schedule Delay in Designing and Building Lead Boat Overview One oversight issue for Congress is the risk of a delay in designing and building the lead Columbia-class boat. As mentioned earlier, the schedule for designing and building the lead boat and having it ready for its scheduled first deterrent patrol in 2031 has little slack for absorbing unforeseen delays due to technical challenges or funding-related issues. A delay in designing and building the lead boat could put at risk the Navy’s ability to have the boat ready for its first scheduled deterrent patrol in 2031, when it is to deploy in the place of the first retiring Ohio-class SSBN. Risks of a delay in designing and building the lead boat relate to  the potential impact of the COVID-19 (aka coronavirus) situation on operations at the two submarine shipyards (GD/EB and HII/NNS) and associated supplier firms, and Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 12  technical challenges or funding-related issues, such as lapses in appropriations or restrictions on spending during periods when DOD is funded under continuing resolutions. Risk Due to COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Situation Operations at the submarine shipyards and/or supplier firms could be affected by the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation if workers remain home rather than report to work because they are either positive for the virus, are remaining home as part of an effort to maintain social distancing, are taking care of children who have been sent home from school for the same reason, or are taking care of family members who have become ill as a result of the virus. Impacts on operations at supplier firms could affect operations at the shipyards, even if staffing at the shipyards themselves is not affected, due to reduced or delayed deliveries to the shipyards of supplier-provided components and materials. The risk of impacts at shipyards and supplier firms due to the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation is not unique to the Columbia-class program—it is a risk faced by all DOD procurement programs. The risk to the Columbia-class program, however, is notable due to the program’s high priority, its tight schedule for designing and building the lead boat, and the potential consequences for the nation’s strategic nuclear deterrent posture if the lead boat is not ready to conduct its first scheduled deterrent patrol in 2031. Potential oversight questions for Congress include the following:  How might the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation affect operations at the two submarine shipyards and associated supplier firms? What impact might this in turn have on the lead boat’s design and construction schedule?  What is the Navy doing to anticipate, monitor, and mitigate the potential risk to the lead boat’s design and construction schedule resulting from the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation? What role, if any, could the Defense Production Act (DPA) or other federal authorities play in responding to the schedule risk posed by the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation?27 An April 29, 2020, press report stated: General Dynamics Electric Boat remains ready to start construction of the first Columbia-class ballistic missile submarine in October, company officials announced Wednesday [April 29]. To date, Electric Boat’s preparations to start building the first of 12 planned Columbia-class boomers, along with work at the yard building the Virginia-class fast attack submarines, has not experienced significant delays due to COVID-19, Phebe Novakovic, the chief executive of General Dynamics, told analysts during a Wednesday conference discussing the company’s first-quarter financial results. “The performance was good and particularly solid at Electric Boat,” Novakovic said. “We’ve also increased our advanced construction on the first Columbia as we approach the planned construction date in October of this year.”… Now, as companies take measures to protect their workforces from catching and spreading COVID-19, Novakovic said the company is working to limit supply chain disruptions and 27 For more on the DPA in the context of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation, see CRS Report R43767, The Defense Production Act of 1950: History, Authorities, and Considerations for Congress, by Michael H. Cecire and Heidi M. Peters, and CRS Insight IN11231, The Defense Production Act (DPA) and COVID-19: Key Authorities and Policy Considerations, by Michael H. Cecire and Heidi M. Peters. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 13 work slowdowns. General Dynamics has pushed roughly $300 million to prop up its suppliers while they deal with business disruptions caused by COVID-19. “Since the onset of the COVID-19 crisis, we have supported our government customers and implemented multiple safety measures to keep our people as safe as possible,” Novakovic said in a statement released before markets opened Wednesday. “We are responding to the COVID travel restrictions’ impact on Gulfstream and are managing our costs throughout our business.”28 For additional discussion of the potential impact of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation on the execution of U.S. military shipbuilding programs, see CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Risk Due to Technical Challenges Overview Independent of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation, at least two technical challenges have already been reported in the Columbia-class program, one first reported in 2017 involving an electric motor,29 and another first reported in 2018 involving faulty welds in the first missile tube sections being built for the lead boat.30 Navy officials have stated that neither of these challenges jeopardized the leads boat’s schedule for being ready for its first patrol in 2031, in part because the Navy—recognizing that it had not built SSBN missile tube sections in many years—had built 23 months of margin into the schedule for manufacturing the missile tube sections. (This is in part why manufacturing of missile tube sections began well ahead of fabrication work on other parts of the submarine.) The problem with the welds reportedly absorbed up to 15 months of that margin, but even after absorbing that delay, 8 or more months of margin remained, and the Navy is working to regain some of the lost margin. 28 Ben Werner, “Pandemic Isn’t Slowing Down Columbia-Class Submarine Construction,” USNI News, April 29, 2020. 29 See, for example, John Grady, “Navy to Congress: Columbia-class Submarine Program Still on Schedule with Little Margin for Error,” USNI News, March 21, 2018; Julia Bergman, “Columbia Submarine Prototype Has First Glitch,” The Day (New London), May 5, 2017; Anthony Capaccio, “Navy Sub’s Overheating Motor First Glitch in $126 Billion System,” Bloomberg, May 4, 2017. See also Government Accountability Office, Columbia Class Submarine[:] Overly Optimistic Cost Estimate Will Likely Lead to Budget Increases, GAO-19-497, April 2019, p. 19. 30 See, for example, David B. Larter, “The US Navy’s Top Acquisition Priority Stumbles Out of the Gate,” Defense News, August 6, 2018; Colin Clark and Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “Nuke Sub Launch Tube Problems Found: ‘Warning Flags Are Up,’” Breaking Defense, August 7, 2018; Ben Werner, “Navy Evaluating Possible Columbia-class Sub Delays Caused by Missile Tube Weld Issues,” USNI News, August 8, 2018; Jason Sherman, “Supplier of Faulty Welding on Subs Working to Understand Scope of Defects,” Inside the Navy, August 10, 2018; Ben Werner, “‘Substantial’ Columbia-class Missile Tube Weld Fix Will Cost $27 Million, Take a Year,” USNI News, November 7, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “Columbia-class Program Upping Oversight of Vendors, Components to Stave Off Further Delays,” USNI News, November 8, 2019; Paul McLeary, “Navy Rushes To Check Contractors After Submarine ‘Debacle,’” Breaking Defense, November 8, 2018; Dan Leone, “Welding Mistake With Columbia Missile Tubes Was Bigger Problem Than BWXT Thought,” Defense Daily, November 9, 2018; Marjorie Censer, “BWX Technologies Takes $27 Million Charge for Missile Tube Rework,” Inside the Navy, November 12, 2018; Justin Katz and Mallory Shelbourne, “Navy Conducting New Inspections of Columbia-Class Submarine Vendors,” Inside the Navy, November 12, 2018. See also Government Accountability Office, Columbia Class Submarine[:] Overly Optimistic Cost Estimate Will Likely Lead to Budget Increases, GAO-19-497, April 2019, pp. 19-20. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 14 Technical challenges could arise in various parts of the ship. One area that may bear close watching is the ship’s electric-drive propulsion system, which is quite different than the mechanical-drive system used in other Navy nuclear-powered submarines.31 Until such time that the Navy can find ways to generate additional margin inside the program’s schedule, the program appears to be in a situation where many things need to go right, and few things can go wrong, between now and 2031 for the lead boat to be ready for its first patrol in 2031.32 In assessing this situation, it can be noted on the one hand that the Columbia-class program’s status as the Navy’s top priority program means that the program can be a high claimant for funding and personnel (including engineers, supervisors, and managers) that can be used to reduce the risk of occurrence of technical challenges that could threaten the lead boat’s 2031 first-patrol date. On the other hand, it can be noted that the lead ship in the Columbia-class program, like the lead ships in most Navy shipbuilding programs, is serving as the program’s prototype, creating an inherent risk of technical challenges. Navy Perspective To help mitigate the risk of technical challenges causing delays that threaten the lead boat’s 2031 first-patrol date, the Navy has been working to generate additional margin inside the schedule for designing and building the lead boat, so as to provide more ability for absorbing delays and thereby make the schedule less brittle and more resilient.33 At a March 27, 2019, hearing before the Seapower subcommittee of the Senate Armed Services Committee on Navy shipbuilding programs, Navy officials testified that for the Columbia-class program, the Navy is implementing Continuous Production on selected shipyard-manufactured items to reduce cost and schedule risk and help strengthen the industrial base with a focus on critical vendors. Advance Construction activities are set to start in June 2019 at General Dynamics Electric Boat and Huntington Ingalls Industries-Newport News to proactively manage schedule margin and reduce controlling path risks for COLUMBIA.34 31 The Navy in the past has built two electric-drive nuclear-powered submarines—the one-of-a-kind attack submarine Tullibee (SSN-597), which was commissioned in 1960 and decommissioned in 1988, and the one-of-a-kind attack submarine Glenard P. Lipscomb (SSN-685) which was commissioned in 1974 and decommissioned in 1990. Those two submarines, however, were designed many years ago, and used electric-drive technology that was different from that in the Columbia-class design. The Navy in recent years has built some surface ships with electric-drive propulsion systems, including 14 Lewis and Clark (TAKE-1) dry cargo ships and three Zumwalt (DDG-1000) destroyers, but the electric-drive technology in those ships, though more modern than that of SSNs 597 and 685, is different and in some respects less advanced than that planned for the Columbia-class design. The Navy has never before built a series-production nuclear-powered submarine class with electric-drive propulsion, and has never built a ship of any kind (surface or submarine) using the combination of advanced electric-drive technologies planned for the Columbia-class design. 32 For additional discussion, see, for example, Jon Harper, “Columbia-Class Program Must Navigate Sea of Risks,” National Defense, November 5, 2018; Dan Leone, “Officers Send Conflicting Signals on Columbia Program Margin,” Defense Daily, February 28, 2019. 33 See, for example, Megan Eckstein, “PEO Subs Working To Buy Back Schedule in Ohio Replacement Program,” USNI News, November 1, 2016. 34 Statement of The Honorable James F. Geurts, Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development and Acquisition ASN(RD&A) and Vice Admiral William R. Merz, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Warfare Systems (OPNAV N9) and Lieutenant General David H. Berger, Deputy Commandant, Combat Development and Integration & Commanding General, Marine Corps Combat Development Command, before the Subcommittee on Seapower of the Senate Armed Services Committee on the Department of the Navy Fiscal Year 2020 Budget Request for Shipbuilding Programs, March 27, 2019, p. 7. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 15 The Navy has been working for years to mitigate the risks associated with the Columbia-class design’s electric-drive system through a technology-development process that includes testing and validation with land-based component prototypes.35 A May 8, 2019, press report states the following: The Navy will have the most complete design ever and will be well into construction when the “official start” of construction on the lead Columbia-class ballistic missile submarine occurs on Oct. 1, 2020, the service’s program manager said. Capt. Jon Rucker said this week that his Columbia class of SSBNs is on a tight schedule—not just to deliver the lead ship in time for an October 2030 first patrol, but to deliver each subsequent ship on time for their own patrols too, as the Ohio-class boomers retire in rapid succession. But his program is managing the risks associated with the tight timeline as best as it can, including bumping up quite a bit of work before the construction phase officially begins. While October 2020 is the official start of construction, Newport News Shipbuilding will kick off its advance construction efforts on June 7, he said, and prime contractor General Dynamics’ Electric Boat is already doing prototyping and advance construction work. Whereas lead ship USS Virginia (SSN-774) was only 1 percent complete when its construction officially began, USS Columbia (SSBN-826) will be 11 percent complete, Rucker said while speaking at the Navy League’s annual Sea Air Space conference. “We are trying to get ahead of that curve to de-risk this program so we can achieve that schedule,” he said, noting that the Columbia-class boomers would be the largest submarines ever built in the United States. The approximately 420 ship specifications and requirements are completed, he said, and the 4,100 design arrangements are about 97.5 percent complete. The Navy is already 44 percent through finalizing the 4.650 design disclosures and is on track to be 83 percent done with the disclosures at the start of construction. In comparison, USS Ohio (SSGN-726) was just 2 percent through disclosures when its construction began; USS Seawolf (SSN-575) was 4 percent complete, USS Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78) was 27 percent complete and Virginia was 43 percent complete. Rucker called this drive to be largely done with the design disclosures—which outline not just the design but the measurements, details about the material, how to build the component and more—an effort to save time and money and to reduce risk, since it will avoid changes later on that will cost time and money. Rucker also announced that, in support of the propeller and propulsor, which take four to five years to build, “the first component of the lead ship Columbia was poured on May 1. So 175,000 pounds—I won’t tell you what it is, I’m not allowed to—175,000 pounds, first component for Columbia, on schedule.” The captain made clear there is still risk in this program, which Navy leadership regularly acknowledges is the service’s top priority and will continue to get all the funding it needs, but still remains risky due to the tight schedule it’s on. Chief of Naval Operations Adm. John Richardson told lawmakers recently that “we are on schedule, but just on schedule. We are on cost, but just on cost.” 35 It might also be argued that while developing the electric-drive system involves overcoming certain technical challenges, developing a mechanical-drive system for the Columbia-class program would have involved not-insignificant technical challenges of its own, and in the end might have produced a system that could not meet the Columbia-class’s performance requirements, which are more demanding in certain respects than those of the Ohio class. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 16 Rucker said in his speech that “there are risks—however, they are risks that we understand and we’re proactively managing.” Perhaps somewhat counterintuitively, the Navy is reducing some schedule risk by adding concurrency to the program—crunching the amount of time between the design process and the construction process in certain areas of the submarine where the design is simpler and needs less time for review before construction begins. Rucker told USNI News during his presentation that the Navy likes to have 52 weeks between design and construction. However, “there are cases where we made a conscious decision to reduce that down to about 30 to 40 weeks. So we reduced it, but in those areas we are micromanaging it every day as we go through, and so we feel that risk is perfectly manageable. Most of the stuff isn’t the complex stuff—it would be like the structural stuff, it’s the basic building a deck, building a foundation, building a tank.” Pulling some of this construction ahead despite what on paper looks like more concurrency risk is what will allow the program to reach 11-percent completion before construction officially starts. “That concurrency is not what you would think that, a person’s designing it and they’re building it in parallel,” Rucker made clear.… Richardson said in his recent testimony to lawmakers that he and Navy Secretary Richard V. Spencer “have made it very clear that, looking forward and anticipating those things that will inevitably arise during testing and everything in such a complex program, we need to work diligently to build more margin into the program.”36 An October 8, 2019 press report states The U.S. Navy’s program for its next-generation ballistic-missile submarine (SSBN), the Columbia class, is on track to start construction on time, but the program has a tight schedule with little margin for delay, the program manager said. “Our biggest risk today is the supplier base,” said Capt. Jon Rucker, program manager for the Columbia SSBN, speaking Oct. 8 at the eighth annual TRIAD Conference in the Washington, D.C., area. Rucker pointed out that when construction of the current Ohio class began, a supplier base of 17,000 companies contributed to the materiel and systems for the boat. Today, the Columbia program is pressing forward with only 3,000 suppliers. The supply of skilled shipyard workers also is a concern to Rucker. He noted that General Dynamics Electric Boat, the prime contractor for the Columbia, is increasing its workforce to 20,000 from 17,000 workers. But the hiring is drawing skilled workers from naval shipyards that routinely maintain subs and carriers. Rucker said that robots have been used in building the Common Missile Compartment for the Columbia class and the U.K. Royal Navy’s Dreadnought-class SSBN. Robots used in welding the missile tubes to the bottom of the hull section took 44 minutes and 8 seconds, compared with 4 days for a human worker. Electric Boat has invested $1.8 billion in facilities to build the Columbia class and Huntington Ingalls Industries’ Newport News Shipbuilding division is spending $800 million to $900 million to support the construction, Rucker said…. 36 Megan Eckstein, “Navy: USS Columbia Will Have Most Complete Design Ever at Official Construction Start,” USNI News, May 8, 2019. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 17 Rucker noted that the Columbia program has a high design maturity, with a design that will be 83% at construction start. By contrast, the Ohio design was only 2% complete at construction start. “We make sure we keep stable requirements,” he said.37 GAO Perspective An April 2019 GAO report states the following: We found that the Navy continues to experience problems with the electric drive of the integrated power system that could potentially affect construction of the lead submarine. A manufacturing defect that affected the system’s first production-representative propulsion motor required extensive repair that consumed 9 months of schedule margin at the land-based test facility. The Navy now plans to test the motor at the same time it had originally scheduled to make any final design changes before starting production. This could constrain opportunities to implement timely, corrective actions if problems are discovered during testing.38 More generally, regarding the risk of delays in designing and building the lead boat, the April 2019 GAO report stated the following: The Navy’s goal is to complete a significant amount of the Columbia class submarine’s design—83 percent—before lead submarine construction begins in October 2020. The Navy established this goal based on lessons learned from another submarine program in an effort to help mitigate its aggressive construction schedule. Achieving this goal may prove to be challenging as the shipbuilder has to use a new design tool to complete an increasingly higher volume of complex design products…. The shipbuilder has hired additional designers to improve its design progress. The Navy also plans to start advance construction of components in each major section of the submarine, beginning in fiscal year 2019, when less of the design will be complete…. The Navy is attempting to mitigate an aggressive schedule for lead submarine construction by (1) setting a goal to mature a significant amount of the submarine’s design prior to the start of construction and (2) beginning advance construction of submarine modules prior to October 2020. The shipbuilder is working to improve design performance and would have to maintain this increased pace to achieve its design goal, which is necessary to mitigate schedule risk associated with constructing the lead submarine. This may prove challenging as it must complete an increasingly higher volume and complexity of design products. At the same time, the Navy is continuing to develop several critical technologies and recent manufacturing defects with the integrated power system and missile tubes are among the challenges that the Navy is facing in ensuring timely delivery of critical components to the shipyard.39 A May 2019 GAO report assessing selected major DOD weapon acquisition programs additionally stated the following regarding the Columbia-class program: Technology Maturity The Columbia class program identified two critical technologies—a carbon dioxide removal system and the stern area system, the details of which are classified. The program 37 Richard R. Burgess, “Columbia Program Manager: Missile Sub Still on Schedule, But Suppliers Present Biggest Risk for Delay,” Seapower, October 8, 2019. 38 See also Government Accountability Office, Columbia Class Submarine[:] Overly Optimistic Cost Estimate Will Likely Lead to Budget Increases, GAO-19-497, April 2019, p. 19. 39 Government Accountability Office, Columbia Class Submarine[:] Overly Optimistic Cost Estimate Will Likely Lead to Budget Increases, GAO-19-497, April 2019, summary page and page 12. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 18 expects the carbon dioxide removal system to reach full maturity in late 2019, while the stern area system is still immature. In December 2017, we reported that several Columbia class technologies that met GAO’s definition of a critical technology element were not identified by the Navy as critical technologies. Specifically, the Navy did not follow best practices for assessing critical technologies. When we applied these best practices, we identified four additional critical technologies that the Navy excluded. These include the integrated power system, the propulsor/coordinated stern, the common missile compartment (CMC), and the nuclear reactor. Of these, only the nuclear reactor is fully mature as of late 2018. The Navy expects the CMC to reach full maturity in 2019. However, officials reported that in July 2018 the shipbuilder identified significant weld defects in CMC missile tubes from one of three suppliers after the supplier had already delivered seven tubes to the shipyard and installation work had begun, resulting in rework. Officials further report that the shipbuilder found defects affected five additional tubes. Program officials attributed these defects to inexperienced welders and weld inspectors. The Navy estimates that, as of January 2019, the CMC consumed 52 percent of its schedule margin. Should the Navy discover additional CMC deficiencies, the planned construction sequence for the lead submarine will be jeopardized. Further, manufacturing defects have delayed delivery of the integrated power system’s (IPS) first production-representative motor. The Navy plans to recover the motor’s schedule margin by testing it while the supplier updates the motor’s production design. Consequently, any new deficiencies discovered in testing may require the supplier to modify its design, which could delay the lead ship’s IPS motor production schedule. Design Stability The program office plans to complete the basic and functional design prior to the lead submarine’s scheduled construction start, in October 2020. However, Navy officials report the shipbuilder has already begun building sections of the submarine, with 95 percent of the basic and functional design complete—a level slightly below best practices. Further, the Navy has determined that the shipbuilder needs to complete 83 percent of the detail design—the most complex design phases down to the lowest level of the submarine—by October 2020 to meet its cost and schedule goals. Currently, the shipbuilder is behind schedule because it has yet not achieved planned efficiencies with new design software. The shipbuilder increased its design staff by 18 percent in an effort to reach the design goal on schedule. However, the program’s plan for achieving design stability is premised on assumptions about the final form, fit, and function of critical technologies—and how those technologies will perform in a realistic environment—that the program has yet to demonstrate. Production Readiness By beginning to build sections of the submarine starting in December 2018, the Navy believes that the builder can achieve an aggressive 84-month construction schedule. However, this is 2 years prior to the planned request for fiscal year 2021 authorization to start construction of the lead ship. Other Program Issues In a April 2019 report, we made several recommendations to improve the program’s cost estimate. Specifically, we found that the program’s $115 billion procurement cost estimate is not reliable because its estimate is based on overly optimistic assumptions about the labor hours needed to construct Columbia class submarines and did not include any cost margin in case these assumptions are not met. While the Navy analyzed program cost risks, it did not include enough margin in its estimate for likely cost growth. The Navy plans to update the cost estimate for the lead ship, but it may not complete this update in time for Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 19 its fiscal year 2021 budget request, which will seek authorization and funding for lead submarine construction. Program Office Comments We provided a draft of this assessment to the program office for review and comment. The program office provided technical comments, which we incorporated where appropriate. The program office stated that it intends to provide needed capabilities on schedule and at an affordable price by committing to stable requirements, achieving high design maturity at the start of construction for the lead submarine, improving manufacturing and construction readiness, and aggressively working to reduce costs. It also said it plans to complete 83 percent of the design by construction start—more than other recent submarine programs. The program also stated that it plans to update its cost estimate in 2019 to inform lead submarine funding. The program noted that the Navy recognizes its supplier base remains a high risk to construction readiness and continues to devote increased oversight on manufacturing issues and readiness assessments. The program said it continues to comply with all Navy, Department of Defense, and statutory requirements for managing critical technologies.40 Pricing of Proposed FY2021 Work Another issue for Congress is whether the Navy has accurately priced the work it is proposing to do in the Columbia-class program in FY2021. This is a standard oversight issue for DOD acquisition programs, but one new factor that may be considered in relation to the question is whether the Navy’s pricing of the work it is proposing to do in FY2021 will be affected by the above-discussed COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation, and if so, in what ways. Risk of Cost Growth Overview Another oversight issue for Congress is the risk of cost growth in the program. As detailed by CBO41 and GAO,42 lead ships in Navy shipbuilding programs in many cases have turned out to be more expensive to build than the Navy had estimated. As discussed in further detail below, CBO and GAO have concluded that there is a significant risk of cost growth in the Columbia-class program. Navy officials, as discussed earlier, have stated consistently since 2013 that the Columbia-class program is the Navy’s top priority program, and that this means, among other things, that from the Navy’s perspective, the Columbia-class program will be funded, even if that comes at the expense of funding for other Navy programs. Given this, the impact of cost growth in the Columbia-class program in a situation of finite DOD funding might be not so much on the execution of the Columbia-class program itself as on the consequent affordability of other DOD programs, perhaps particularly other Navy shipbuilding programs. The issue of the potential impact of the Columbia-class program on the affordability of other DOD programs is discussed in a subsequent section of this report. 40 Government Accountability Office, Weapon Systems Annual Assessment[:] Limited Use of Knowledge-Based Practices Continues to Undercut DOD’s Investments, GAO-19-336SP, May 2019, p. 124. 41 See Congressional Budget Office, An Analysis of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2019 Shipbuilding Plan, October 2018, p. 25, including Figure 10. 42 See Government Accountability Office, Navy Shipbuilding[:] Past Performance Provides Valuable Lessons for Future Investments, GAO-18-238SP, June 2018, p. 8. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 20 Navy Perspective Navy Confidence Level at Milestone B Was Less Than 50% A January 30, 2020, Navy information paper provided to CRS and CBO states that, at the time of Milestone B for the Columbia-class program, the Navy had assigned a confidence level of 43% to its estimated procurement cost for the lead ship in the Columbia class and a confidence level of 46% to its estimated average procurement cost for ships 2 through 12 in program. What this means is that the Navy at the time of Milestone B had calculated that there was more than a 50% chance that the procurement costs of Columbia-class boats would turn out to be greater than what the Navy estimates. The January 30, 2020, Navy information paper states the following: The Milestone B Service Cost Position established [in] January 2017 is the most recent analysis for the COLUMBIA program that updated risk estimates for Lead Ship End Cost less Plans and the Average Follow Ship End Cost. The confidence levels associated with the Milestone B Service Cost Position for Lead Ship End Cost less Plans and Average Follow Ship End Cost estimates are approximately 43% and 46% respectively.43 The January 30, 2020, Navy information paper provided the confidence levels and corresponding estimated unit procurement costs shown in Table 2. Table 2. Navy Confidence Levels for Estimated Columbia-Class Unit Procurement Costs (dollars figures in billions of constant 2019 dollars) Confidence level decile End cost of lead ship (less plans) Average end cost of ships 2-12 30% $8.1 $6.3 40% $8.4 $6.6 50% $8.7 $6.9 60% $9.0 $7.1 70% $9.3 $7.4 80% $9.6 $7.8 Source: Navy information paper, “Update on Confidence Levels for COLUMBIA Lead Ship and Follow Ship,” January 30, 2020, received by CRS and CBO from Navy Legislative Affairs Office, February 10, 2020. Notes: End cost of lead ship includes cost for the ship’s missile tube module, which was funded through the Navy’s research and development account. Navy Confidence Level as of May 2019 Was 50% Navy officials stated in May 2019 that during the time that has transpired since Milestone B, certain risk elements affecting the calculation of confidence levels have been retired, and that as a result, the Navy’s confidence level for its costs estimates had increased to 50%, meaning that the Navy as of May 2019 calculated that there is a 50% chance that the procurement costs of Columbia-class boats will turn out to be greater than what the Navy estimates, and a 50% chance 43 Navy information paper, “Update on Confidence Levels for COLUMBIA Lead Ship and Follow Ship,” January 30, 2020, received by CRS and CBO from Navy Legislative Affairs Office, February 10, 2020. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 21 that it will turn out to be less than what the Navy estimates. Navy officials also stated in May 2019 that a confidence level of 50% is where they want the Navy’s estimate to be.44 CBO Perspective An October 2019 CBO report on the cost of the Navy’s shipbuilding programs stated the following (emphasis added): The cost of the 12 Columbia class submarines included in the 2020 shipbuilding plan is one of the most significant uncertainties in the Navy’s and CBO’s analyses of future shipbuilding costs…. According to the Navy’s estimate, the cost per thousand tons for the first Columbia would be 14 percent less than that of the first Virginia class attack submarine—an improvement that would affect costs for the entire new class of ballistic missile submarines. The Navy anticipates lower costs per thousand tons for the Columbia because it plans to recycle, to the extent possible, the design, technology, and components used for the Virginia class. Furthermore, because ballistic missile submarines like the Columbia class tend to be larger and less densely built than attack submarines like the Virginia class, the Navy maintains that they will be easier to build and thus less expensive per thousand tons. The Navy has stated, however, that there is a 50 percent chance that the cost of the first Columbia and subsequent ships of the class will exceed its estimates, and CBO’s cost estimates are about 9 percent greater than the Navy’s. The costs of lead ships of new classes of submarines built in the 1970s and 1980s provide little evidence that ballistic missile submarines are cheaper per ton to build than attack submarines…. The first Ohio class submarine was more expensive to build than the lead ships of the two classes of attack submarines built during the same period—the Los Angeles and the Improved Los Angeles. (The design of the Improved Los Angeles included the addition of 12 vertical-launch system cells.) In addition, the average cost-to-weight ratio of the first 12 or 13 ships of the class was virtually identical for the Ohio, Los Angeles, and Improved Los Angeles classes. Moreover, although the cost by weight of lead ships for submarines had grown substantially by the 1990s, there was still little evidence that submarine size affected the cost per thousand tons. The first Virginia class submarine, which was ordered in 1998, cost about the same per thousand tons as the first Seawolf submarine even though the Seawolf is 20 percent larger and was built nine years earlier. CBO estimates that purchasing the first Columbia class submarine would cost $14.0 billion, $700 million more than the Navy estimates. Estimating the cost of the lead ship of a class with a new design is particularly difficult because of uncertainty about how much the Navy will spend on nonrecurring engineering and detailed design. Including appropriations from 2017 to 2019, CBO estimates that, all told, 12 Columbia class submarines would cost $95 billion (of which $90 billion would occur between 2020 and 2036), or an average of $7.9 billion each—$700 million more per submarine than the Navy estimates. That average is based on the $14.0 billion estimated cost of the lead submarine and an average cost of $7.4 billion estimated for the 2nd through 12th submarines. Research and development would cost between $14 billion and $18 billion, CBO estimates. Overall, the Navy expects a 14 percent improvement in the cost-to-weight ratio of the Columbia class compared with the first 12 submarines in the Virginia class. Given the history of submarine construction, however, CBO is less optimistic than the Navy. CBO estimates that the Navy would realize a 6 percent improvement, stemming in part from the 44 Source: Navy briefing on Columbia class program for CRS and CBO, May 13, 2019. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 22 projected savings attributable to the concurrent production of the Columbia and Virginia class submarines. The costs for the Columbia class submarines could be lower than the Navy and CBO project, depending on the acquisition strategy. The Navy is purchasing the submarines through the National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund, which was established by the Carl Levin and Howard P. “Buck” McKeon National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2015 (Public Law 113-291). The Congress appropriates money for the program in the Navy’s main shipbuilding account, and then DoD transfers money into the fund. The Navy could realize savings from special procurement authorities associated with that fund, such as the ability to purchase components and materials for several submarines, and possibly for other ships, at the same time. Further savings could be considerable if, for example, lawmakers authorized the Navy to use a block-buy strategy—an approach it has used with other types of ships. A block-buy strategy allows the Navy to purchase a group of submarines over a specified period (effectively lowering the price of the ships by promising a steady stream of work for the shipyards) and to buy components and materials for the submarines in optimal amounts that minimize costs (known as economic order quantities).22 One disadvantage of the strategy is that if lawmakers later decided not to build all the submarines, materials that were purchased for the unbuilt ships might go unused. A block-buy strategy might also leave the Congress with less flexibility to change procurement plans or to purchase fewer submarines if lawmakers did not approve of how the program was progressing. Costs for the Columbia class submarines could, however, exceed both the Navy’s and CBO’s estimates. The new SSBN would be the largest submarine that the United States has ever built. It is expected to reuse some technology and components from the Virginia class submarine, but it would also include many new elements, such as an all-electric drive system, an X-stern ship control system (where the rear rudders and dive planes are shaped like an X, rather than a + as on the Ohio class), a new missile compartment, and a nuclear reactor that is designed to last the entire 42-year service life of the submarine. One production challenge that has already occurred on the new SSBN is that its missile tubes required many welds to be redone, further tightening the Columbia class schedule. Such challenges are not uncommon on lead ships, and they may indicate future difficulties. First ships of a new class often experience substantial cost growth….45 GAO Perspective An April 2019 GAO report on the Columbia-class program stated the following: The Navy’s $115 billion procurement cost estimate is not reliable partly because it is based on overly optimistic assumptions about the labor hours needed to construct the submarines. While the Navy analyzed cost risks, it did not include margin in its estimate for likely cost overruns. The Navy told us it will continue to update its lead submarine cost estimate, but an independent assessment of the estimate may not be complete in time to inform the Navy’s 2021 budget request to Congress to purchase the lead submarine. Without these reviews, the cost estimate—and, consequently, the budget—may be unrealistic. A reliable cost estimate is especially important for a program of this size and complexity to help ensure that its budget is sufficient to execute the program as planned. The Navy is using the congressionally-authorized National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund to construct the Columbia class. The Fund allows the Navy to purchase material and start construction early on multiple submarines prior to receiving congressional authorization and funding for submarine construction. The Navy anticipates achieving savings through 45 Congressional Budget Office, An Analysis of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2020 Shipbuilding Plan, October 2019, pp. 19-22. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 23 use of the Fund, such as buying certain components early and in bulk, but did not include the savings in its cost estimate. The Navy may have overestimated its savings as higher than those historically achieved by other such programs. Without an updated cost estimate and cost risk analysis, including a realistic estimate of savings, the fiscal year 2021 budget request may not reflect funding needed to construct the submarine.46 Cost-Plus Incentive Fee (CPIF) Block Buy Contract Another aspect of the issue of the risk of cost growth in the program concerns the Navy’s intent to use a cost-plus incentive fee (CPIF) block buy contract rather than a fixed-priced block buy contract to procure the first two ships in the class. Skeptics could argue that using a CPIF contract will increase the risk of cost growth on the first two ships because it will insulate the builders from much of the financial risk of cost growth, providing them with a reduced incentive to control costs. They could argue that while the Navy has used cost-plus type contracts for lead ships in other shipbuilding programs, the Navy in this case is proposing to use one for a two-ship block buy contract, extending the risk of cost growth to the second ship in the program. They could argue that while insulating builders from the risks and uncertainties of building lead ships has been a traditional shipbuilding consideration, the risks in this case are to be reduced by the Navy’s strategy of bringing the Columbia-class design to a high state of completion prior to starting construction on the lead ship. Supporters of using a cost-plus type contract could argue that doing so is a traditional approach for procuring a lead ship in a Navy shipbuilding program that recognizes that the lead ship in effect serves as the program’s prototype and thus presents the builders with substantial risks and uncertainties regarding construction costs, even with a design that has been brought to a high state of completion prior to starting construction. They could argue that this is particularly true in this case, given that this is the first lead ship in a Navy SSBN program to start construction in about 47 years.47 They could argue that builders will still have an incentive to control costs because of the incentive fee in the contract, and because they understand that cost growth in the Columbia-class program could reduce funding available for other Navy priorities, including procurement of Virginia-class attack submarines that these firms also build. Program Affordability and Impact on Other Navy Shipbuilding Programs Another issue for Congress—one that observers have focused on for several years—concerns the potential impact of the Columbia-class program on funding that will be available for other Navy programs, including other shipbuilding programs, particularly during the 10-year period FY2026-FY2035, when the Navy plans to procure one Columbia-class boat per year. Other things held equal, cost growth in the Columbia-class program (see the earlier discussion of the risk of cost growth in the program) could reinforce concerns about the potential impact of the Columbia-class program on funding that will be available for other Navy programs, including other shipbuilding programs. Even without such cost growth, however, this issue would remain as a matter of concern. 46 Government Accountability Office, Columbia Class Submarine[:] Overly Optimistic Cost Estimate Will Likely Lead to Budget Increases, GAO-19-497, April 2019, summary page. 47 The lead ship in the Ohio-class SSBN program was procured in FY1974—47 years before the scheduled FY2021 procurement date for the lead ship in the Columbia-class program. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 24 Starting in FY2026, when the Navy plans to procure one Columbia-class boat per year for a period of 10 years, the Navy estimates that the Columbia-class program will require, in constant FY2019 dollars, roughly $7 billion per year in procurement funding.48 Several years ago, when the Navy’s shipbuilding budget was being funded at a level of roughly $14 billion per year, observers were concerned that the Columbia-class program during the period FY2026-FY2035 could absorb as much as half of the Navy’s shipbuilding budget, leaving relatively little funding available for all other Navy shipbuilding programs. Over the last several years, the Navy’s shipbuilding budget has been increased to an annual funding level of roughly $24 billion per year. In a context of a shipbuilding budget of roughly $24 billion per year, a Columbia-class requirement for roughly $7 billion per year does not loom as large proportionately as it once did. Concerns remain, however, about funding that will be available for the procurement of other kinds of ships. The Navy’s report on its FY2020 30-year shipbuilding plan states the following: The fiscal impact of the new SSBN begins in FY2023 with advanced procurement [funding], and then increases in FY2026 with full annual procurements. This represents Navy’s largest fiscal challenge for near-term budgets and could impact the pace of procuring other ship types – potentially causing a drop below the steady profiles [shown elsewhere in this report].49 At a March 27, 2019, hearing before the Seapower subcommittee of the Senate Armed Services Committee on Navy shipbuilding programs, Navy officials testified that the COLUMBIA Class program remains the Navy’s number one acquisition priority program and is on track to start construction in October 2020 and deliver to pace the retirement of our current ballistic missile submarines, deploying for its first patrol in FY 2031. To better align focus and resources and ensure successful delivery of this program to the Fleet, DON has established Program Executive Office COLUMBIA. Additional resources above the Navy’s [budget] topline will be required for the Navy to fund serial production of the COLUMBIA Class SSBN and maintain its planned shipbuilding profile.50 The creation of the National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund (NSBDF) and the amending of the statute governing the fund to include special acquisition authorities can be viewed as one response to concerns about the potential impact of the Columbia-class program on funding that will be available for other Navy programs, including other shipbuilding programs. For additional information about the NSBDF, see Appendix E. Another potential option for reducing the potential impact of the Columbia-class program on funding that will be available for other Navy programs, including other shipbuilding programs, would be to reduce the Columbia-class program to something fewer than 12 boats. Over the years, for various reasons, some observers have advocated or presented options for an SSBN 48 See U.S. Navy, Report to Congress on the Annual Long-Range Plan for Construction of Naval Vessels for Fiscal Year 2020, Figure A4-1 on p. 18. 49 See U.S. Navy, Report to Congress on the Annual Long-Range Plan for Construction of Naval Vessels for Fiscal Year 2020, p. 7. A similar statement appears on page 17. See also Megan Eckstein, “Navy Wants Alternative Funding for Columbia SSBNs to Accelerate 355-Ship Fleet,” USNI News, November 27, 2018; Rich Abott, “Navy Looking For Separate Funding For Columbia Subs,” Defense Daily, November 30, 2018. 50 Statement of The Honorable James F. Geurts, Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development and Acquisition ASN(RD&A) and Vice Admiral William R. Merz, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Warfare Systems (OPNAV N9) and Lieutenant General David H. Berger, Deputy Commandant, Combat Development and Integration & Commanding General, Marine Corps Combat Development Command, before the Subcommittee on Seapower of the Senate Armed Services Committee on the Department of the Navy Fiscal Year 2020 Budget Request for Shipbuilding Programs, March 27, 2019, p. 6. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 25 force of fewer than 12 SSBNs. A November 2013 CBO report on options for reducing the federal budget deficit, for example, presented an option for reducing the SSBN force to 8 boats as a cost-reduction measure.51 Earlier CBO reports have presented options for reducing the SSBN force to 10 boats as a cost-reduction measure.52 CBO reports that present such options also provide notional arguments for and against the options. A June 2010 report by a group known as the Sustainable Defense Task Force recommended reducing the SSBN force to 7 boats,53 a September 2010 report from the Cato Institute recommended reducing the SSBN force to 6 boats,54 and a September 2013 report from a group organized by the Stimson Center recommended reducing the force to 10 boats.55 Views on whether a force of fewer than 12 Columbia-class boats would be appropriate could depend on, among other things, assessments of strategic nuclear threats to the United States and the role of SSBNs in deterring such threats as a part of overall U.S. strategic nuclear forces, as influenced by the terms of strategic nuclear arms control agreements.56 Reducing the number of SSBNs below 12 could also raise a question as to whether the force should continue to be homeported at both Bangor, WA, and Kings Bay, GA, or consolidated at a single location. The Navy’s position is that the current requirement for having a certain number of SSBNs on patrol translates into a need for a force of 14 Ohio-class boats, and that this requirement can be met in the future by a force of 12 Columbia-class boats. Industrial-Base Challenges of Building Both Columbia- and Virginia-Class Boats Another oversight issue for Congress concerns potential industrial-base challenges of building both Columbia-class boats and Virginia-class attack submarines (SSNs) at the same time, particularly as procurement of Virginia-class submarines shifts to production of a new and larger version of the Virginia-class design that incorporates an additional mid-ship section called the Virginia Payload Module (VPM).57 Observers have expressed concern about the industrial base’s capacity for building both Columbia- and Virginia-class boats without encountering bottlenecks or other production problems in one or both of these programs. Concerns about the ability of the submarine construction industrial base to execute an eventual procurement rate of two VPM-equipped Virginia-class boats and one Columbia-class boat per year have been heightened by recent reports of challenges faced by the two submarine-construction shipyards (GD/EB and HII/NNS), as well as submarine component supplier firms in meeting scheduled delivery times for Virginia-class boats as the Virginia-class program transitions over time from production of 51 Congressional Budget Office, Options for Reducing the Deficit: 2014 to 2023, November 2013, pp. 68-69. 52 See, for example, Congressional Budget Office, Rethinking the Trident Force, July 1993, 78 pp.; and Congressional Budget Office, Budget Options, March 2000, p. 62. 53 Debt, Deficits, and Defense, A Way Forward[:] Report of the Sustainable Defense Task Force, June 11, 2010, pp. 19-20. 54 Benjamin H. Friedman and Christopher Preble, Budgetary Savings from Military Restraint, Washington, Cato Institute, September 23, 2010 (Policy Analysis No. 667), p. 8. 55 Strategic Agility: Strong National Defense for Today’s Global and Fiscal Realities, Stimson, Washington, DC, 2013, p. 29. (Sponsored by the Peter G. Peterson Foundation, Prepared by Stimson, September 2013.) 56 For further discussion, see CRS Report RL33640, U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues, by Amy F. Woolf. 57 For more on the VPM, see CRS Report RL32418, Navy Virginia (SSN-774) Class Attack Submarine Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 26 two “regular” Virginia-class boats per year to two VPM-equipped boats per year.58 Potential oversight questions for Congress include the following:  Do the Navy and the submarine builders agree on the question of the capacity of the industrial base to support various potential Columbia- and Virginia-class workloads?  What steps are the Navy, the submarine builders, and submarine supplier firms taking to bring the capacity of the industrial base more into alignment with desired submarine procurement rates? What are the costs of these steps, and what portion of these costs will be borne by the government? Regarding the second bullet point above, a November 7, 2019, press report states The Navy and submarine builders General Dynamics Electric Boat and Newport News Shipbuilding are executing a recovery plan to get Block IV Virginia-class submarine production back on track, after the last five submarines in Block III delivered late. The Virginia-class program had previously been held up as a model of efficient procurement, as the boats were delivering on-cost and on-schedule—or at times beating cost and schedule—and former Navy Secretary Ray Mabus grew to joke about the program as having a punch-card rewards program to get 10 subs for the price of nine. Delivery times also dropped from 84 months to 72 and then to 66, on their way down to 60 months for Block IV. But as the program moved from building one a year to two a year, the subs stopped delivering on time. “The way we build our submarines, there’s four super modules [that make up each boat]: two built at EB, two built at Newport News. From their module perspective, they have to deliver a module (one of each kind) every six months. And you look the entire fabrication, from the pipe shop to pre-fab to sub-modules to modules, when you’re at that cadence of two per year, every part of that assembly line must be on cadence. At the pre-fab, at the sub-module, the footprint, the people, the tools, the procedures. So what we learned is, if you get out of cadence in any part of that step, you’re going to impact final assembly and test. So that’s what happened,” Rear Adm. David Goggins, the program executive officer for submarines, said in response to a USNI News question during a question-and-answer session at the Naval Submarine League’s annual symposium. “So the companies have put together a recovery plan. We have the metrics. And the key thing is getting back to cadence across the entire production line, from the pipe shop, pre-fab, sub-modules, modules and final assembly and test. Our plan has us getting back to cadence by the end of next year,” he said. 58 See, for example, Government Accountability Office, Columbia Class Submarine[:] Overly Optimistic Cost Estimate Will Likely Lead to Budget Increases, GAO-19-497, April 2019, pp. 20-23; David B. Larter, “Late Is the New Normal for Virginia-Class Attack Boats,” Defense News, March 20, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “Navy: Lack of Submarine Parts Slowing Down Maintenance, New Construction,” USNI News, March 26, 2019; David B. Larter, “The US Navy, Seeking Savings, Shakes Up Its Plans for More Lethal Attack Submarines,” Defense News, April 3, 2019; Anthony Capaccio, “U.S. Navy Sub Firepower Upgrade Delayed by Welding Flaws,” Bloomberg, August 13, 2019; Paul McLeary, “Weld Problems Spread To Second Navy Sub Program,” Breaking Defense, August 14, 2019; David B. Larter, “Questions About US Navy Attack Sub Program Linger as Contract Negotiations Drag,” Defense News, August 16, 2019; Emma Watkins, “Will the U.S. Navy Soon Have a Missile-Tube Problem?” National Interest, August 19, 2019; David B. Larter, “As CNO Richardson Departs, US Submarine Builders Face Pressure,” Defense News, August 22, 2019; David B. Larter, “After a Leadership Shakeup at General Dynamics, a Murky Future for Submarine Building,” Defense News, October 28, 2019; Rich Abott, “Navy Says Virginia Sub Delays Due To Faster Production Rate,” Defense Daily, November 6, 2019. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 27 Speaking to USNI News after the event, Goggins said that Newport News Shipbuilding had expanded its footprint at its Virginia shipyard to try to keep up with the higher workload, which wouldn’t be sustainable in the long-run as the shipyard also begins work on the upcoming Columbia-class ballistic missile submarine program. “At Newport News they expanded to additional footprint, and now the key thing is, over the next year and a half, through the end of next year, is getting those modules completed on schedule,” Goggins told USNI News. “So by the end of next year, we’re back to cadence and using the planned footprint with the planned resources to go execute module deliveries.” He said metrics are in place to ensure the company is on track to meet this goal. Asked if any significant hurdles remain, he said, “they need to go execute the plan. They have the people, they have the footprint, they have the tooling; they just have to go execute, which they’re doing today.” Tom Plante, the director of strategic planning for Electric Boat, told USNI News during a September visit to the Connecticut shipyard that some of the vendors were unable to keep up with the faster pace of shipbuilding, either sending parts late or sending parts with deficiencies that had to be later ripped out of modules and replaced. “We were challenged to meet our schedules in Block IV, and some of that is program execution, some of that is ripples caused by [continuing resolutions] and funding and plus-ups,” Plante said. “If we get off that rhythm, if we get off that cadence, that causes these ripples, and it takes multiple ships to work through that. If you have a supply problem—non-conforming material comes in and I’ve got to stop, I’ve got to go assess, I’ve got to rip things out, I’ve got to re-do things—then that all adds time and cost to construction execution by shipbuilders.” Goggins said Wednesday [November 6] that it would be important to keep the recovery plan on track and get the Virginia production line under control so problems don’t spill over and affect the Columbia class of SSBNs. “The key thing is getting back to cadence across the entire production line, and that is needed to ensure the success of the Columbia program, which is key,” the rear admiral said. Despite the challenge keeping up with the faster delivery schedule, Goggins said the Virginia-class submarines have been delivering at ever-higher quality. The future Delaware (SSN-791) completed its sea trials on Oct. 10 and delivered on Oct. 25 and was the highest-quality sub delivered to date, according to the Board of Inspection and Survey (INSURV) report, Goggins said.59 Legislative Activity for FY2021 Summary of Congressional Action on FY2021 Funding Request Table 3 below summarizes congressional action on the Navy’s FY2021 funding request for the Columbia-class program. 59 Megan Eckstein, “Navy, Sub Builders Have Recovery Plan to Get Virginia Attack Boat deliveries Back on Schedule,” USNI News, November 7, 2019. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 28 Table 3. Congressional Action on FY2021 Funding Request (Millions of then-year dollars, rounded to nearest tenth; totals may not add due to rounding) Request Authorization Appropriation HASC SASC Conf. HAC SAC Conf. Department of Defense (DOD) Funding Research and development (R&D) PE0603570N (line 047)/Project 3219 80.1 PE0603595N (line 052/Project 3220 317.2 Subtotal R&D 397.3 Procurement Procurement 2,891.5 Advance procurement (AP) 1,123.2 Subtotal Procurement 4,014.7 TOTAL DOD Funding 4,412.0 Department of Energy (DOE) funding Naval Reactors—Columbia-class reactor systems development 64.7 Source: Navy FY2021 budget submission and committee and conference reports, explanatory statements on FY2021 National Defense Authorization Act and FY2021 DOD Appropriations Act, and (for appropriations figures for DOE Naval Reactors funding), committee and conference reports on the FY2021 Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act. Notes: PE means Program Element, that is, a research and development line item. A Program Element may include several projects. PE0603570N/Project 3219 is the SSBN(X) reactor plant project within the PE for Advanced Nuclear Power Systems. PE0603595N/Project 3220 is the Sea-Based Strategic Deterrent (SBSD) Advanced Submarine System Development project within the PE for Ohio Replacement. HASC is House Armed Services Committee; SASC is Senate Armed Services Committee; HAC is House Appropriations Committee; SAC is Senate Appropriations Committee; Conf. is conference agreement. SCN is Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy; NSBDF is National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund. The procurement funding requested for FY2018 is advance procurement (AP) funding. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 29 Appendix A. Summary of Past U.S. SSBN Designs This appendix provides background information on the four SSBN classes that the United States has operated since 1959. The four classes are summarized in Table A-1. As shown in the table, the size of U.S. SSBNs has grown over time, reflecting in part a growth in the size and number of SLBMs carried on each boat. The Ohio class carries an SLBM (the D-5) that is much larger than the SLBMs carried by earlier U.S. SSBNs, and it carries 24 SLBMs, compared to the 16 on earlier U.S. SSBNs.60 In part for these reasons, the Ohio-class design, with a submerged displacement of 18,750 tons, is more than twice the size of earlier U.S. SSBNs. Table A-1. U.S. SSBN Classes George Washington (SSBN-598) class Ethan Allen (SSBN-608) class Lafayette/Benjamin Franklin (SSBN-616/640) class Ohio (SSBN-726) class Number in class 5 5 31 18/14 Fiscal years procured FY1958-FY1959 FY1959 and FY1961 FY1961-FY1964 FY1974/FY1977 -FY1991 Years in commission 1959-1985 1961-1992 1963-2002 1981/1984-present Length 381.7 feet 410.5 feet 425 feet 560 feet Beam 33 feet 33 feet 33 feet 42 feet Submerged displacement 6,700 tons 7,900 tons 8,250 tons 18,750 tons Number of SLBM launch tubes 16 16 16 24 (to be reduced to 20 by 2018) Final type(s) of SLBM carried Polaris A-3 Polaris A-3 Poseidon C-3/ Trident I C-4 Trident II D-5 Diameter of those SLBMs 54 inches 54 inches 74 inches 83 inches Length of those SLBMs 32.3 feet 32.3 feet 34 feet 44 feet Weight of each SLBM (pounds) 36,000 pounds 36,000 pounds 65,000/73,000 pounds ~130,000 pounds Range of SLBMs ~2,500 nm ~2,500 nm ~2,500 nm/~4,000 nm ~4,000 nm Sources: Prepared by CRS based on data in Norman Polmar, The Ships and Aircraft of the U.S. Fleet, Annapolis, Naval Institute Press, various editions, and (for SSBN decommissioning dates) U.S. Naval Vessel Register. Notes: Beam is the maximum width of a ship. For the submarines here, which have cylindrical hulls, beam is the diameter of the hull. The range of an SLBM can vary, depending on the number and weight of nuclear warheads it carries; actual ranges can be lesser or greater than those shown. The George Washington-class boats were procured as modifications of SSNs that were already under construction. Three of the boats were converted into SSNs toward the ends of their lives and were 60 The larger size of the Ohio-class design also reflects a growth in size over time in U.S. submarine designs due to other reasons, such as providing increased interior volume for measures to quiet the submarine acoustically, so as to make it harder to detect. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 30 decommissioned in 1983-1985. The two boats that remained SSBNs throughout their lives were decommissioned in 1981. All five Ethan Allen-class boats were converted into SSNs toward the ends of their lives. The boats were decommissioned in 1983 (two boats), 1985, 1991, and 1992. Two of the Lafayette/Benjamin Franklin-class boats were converted into SSNs toward the ends of their lives and were decommissioned in 1999 and 2002. The 29 that remained SSBNs throughout their lives were decommissioned in 1986-1995. For 19 of the boats, the Poseidon C-3 was the final type of SLBM carried; for the other 12, the Trident I C-4 SLBM was the final type of SLBM carried. A total of 18 Ohio-class SSBNs were built. The first four, which entered service in 1981-1984, were converted into SSGNs in 2002-2008. The remaining 14 boats entered service in 1984-1997. Although Ohio-class SSBNs are designed to each carry 24 SLBMs, by 2018, four SLBM launch tubes on each boat are to be deactivated, and the number of SLBMs that can be carried by each boat consequently is to be reduced to 20, so that the number of operational launchers and warheads in the U.S. force will comply with strategic nuclear arms control limits. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 31 Appendix B. U.S.-UK Cooperation on SLBMs and the New UK SSBN This appendix provides background information on U.S.-UK cooperation on SLBMs and the UK’s next-generation SSBN, previously called the Successor-class SSBN and now called the Dreadnought-class SSBN. The UK’s four Vanguard-class SSBNs, which entered service in 1993-1999, each carry 16 Trident II D-5 SLBMs. Previous classes of UK SSBNs similarly carried earlier-generation U.S. SLBMs.61 The UK’s use of U.S.-made SLBMs on its SSBNs is one element of a long-standing close cooperation between the two countries on nuclear-related issues that is carried out under the 1958 Agreement for Cooperation on the Uses of Atomic Energy for Mutual Defense Purposes (also known as the Mutual Defense Agreement). Within the framework established by the 1958 agreement, cooperation on SLBMs in particular is carried out under the 1963 Polaris Sales Agreement and a 1982 Exchange of Letters between the two governments.62 The Navy testified in 61 Although the SLBMs on UK SSBNs are U.S.-made, the nuclear warheads on the missiles are of UK design and manufacture. 62 A March 18, 2010, report by the UK Parliament’s House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee stated the following: During the Cold War, the UK’s nuclear co-operation with the United States was considered to be at the heart of the [UK-U.S.] ‘special relationship’. This included the 1958 Mutual Defence Agreement, the 1963 Polaris Sales Agreement (PSA) (subsequently amended for Trident), and the UK’s use of the US nuclear test site in Nevada from 1962 to 1992. The co-operation also encompassed agreements for the United States to use bases in Britain, with the right to store nuclear weapons, and agreements for two bases in Yorkshire (Fylingdales and Menwith Hill) to be upgraded to support US missile defence plans. In 1958, the UK and US signed the Mutual Defence Agreement (MDA). Although some of the appendices, amendments and Memoranda of Understanding remain classified, it is known that the agreement provides for extensive co-operation on nuclear warhead and reactor technologies, in particular the exchange of classified information concerning nuclear weapons to improve design, development and fabrication capability. The agreement also provides for the transfer of nuclear warhead-related materials. The agreement was renewed in 2004 for another ten years. The other major UK-US agreement in this field is the 1963 Polaris Sales Agreement (PSA) which allows the UK to acquire, support and operate the US Trident missile system. Originally signed to allow the UK to acquire the Polaris Submarine Launched Ballistic Missile (SLBM) system in the 1960s, it was amended in 1980 to facilitate purchase of the Trident I (C4) missile and again in 1982 to authorise purchase of the more advanced Trident II (D5) in place of the C4. In return, the UK agreed to formally assign its nuclear forces to the defence of NATO, except in an extreme national emergency, under the terms of the 1962 Nassau Agreement reached between President John F. Kennedy and Prime Minister Harold Macmillan to facilitate negotiation of the PSA. Current nuclear co-operation takes the form of leasing arrangements of around 60 Trident II D5 missiles from the US for the UK’s independent deterrent, and long-standing collaboration on the design of the W76 nuclear warhead carried on UK missiles. In 2006 it was revealed that the US and the UK had been working jointly on a new ‘Reliable Replacement Warhead’ (RRW) that would modernise existing W76-style designs. In 2009 it emerged that simulation testing at Aldermaston on dual axis hydrodynamics experiments had provided the US with scientific data it did not otherwise possess on this RRW programme. The level of co-operation between the two countries on highly sensitive military technology is, according to the written submission from Ian Kearns, “well above the norm, even for a close alliance relationship”. He quoted Admiral William Crowe, the former US Ambassador to London, who likened the UK-US nuclear relationship to that of an iceberg, “with a small tip of it sticking out, but beneath the water there is quite a bit of everyday business that goes on between our two governments in a fashion that’s unprecedented in the world.” Dr Kearns also commented that the Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 32 March 2010 that “the United States and the United Kingdom have maintained a shared commitment to nuclear deterrence through the Polaris Sales Agreement since April 1963. The U.S. will continue to maintain its strong strategic relationship with the UK for our respective follow-on platforms, based upon the Polaris Sales Agreement.”63 The first Vanguard-class SSBN was originally projected to reach the end of its service life in 2024, but an October 2010 UK defense and security review report states that the lives of the Vanguard class ships will now be extended by a few years, so that the four boats will remain in service into the late 2020s and early 2030s.64 The UK plans to replace the four Vanguard-class boats with three or four next-generation Dreadnought-class boats are to be equipped with 12 missile launch tubes, but current UK plans call for each boat to carry eight D-5 SLBMs, with the other four tubes not being used for SLBMs. The report states that “‘Main Gate’—the decision to start building the submarines—is required around 2016.”65 The first new boat is to be delivered by 2028, or about four years later than previously planned.66 The United States is assisting the UK with certain aspects of the Dreadnought SSBN program. In addition to the modular Common Missile Compartment (CMC), the United States is assisting the UK with the new PWR-3 reactor plant67 to be used by the Dreadnought SSBN. A December 2011 press report states that “there has been strong [UK] collaboration with the US [on the Dreadnought program], particularly with regard to the CMC, the PWR, and other propulsion technology,” and that the design concept selected for the Dreadnought class employs “a new propulsion plant based on a US design, but using next-generation UK reactor technology (PWR-3) and modern secondary propulsion systems.”68 The U.S. Navy states that Naval Reactors, a joint Department of Energy/Department of Navy organization responsible for all aspects of naval nuclear propulsion, has an ongoing technical exchange with the UK Ministry of Defence under the US/UK 1958 Mutual Defence Agreement. The personal bonds between the US/UK scientific and technical establishments were deeply rooted. (House of Commons, Foreign Affairs Committee, Sixth Report Global Security: UK-US Relations, March 18, 2010, paragraphs 131-135; http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200910/cmselect/cmfaff/114/11402.htm; paragraphs 131-135 are included in the section of the report available at http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200910/cmselect/cmfaff/114/11406.htm.) See also “U.K. Stays Silent on Nuclear-Arms Pact Extension with United States,” Global Security Newswire, July 30, 2014. 63 Statement of Rear Admiral Stephen Johnson, USN, Director, Strategic Systems Programs, Before the Subcommittee on Strategic Forces of the Senate Armed Services Committee [on] FY2011 Strategic Systems, March 17, 2010, p. 6. 64 Securing Britain in an Age of Uncertainty: The Strategic Defence and Security Review, Presented to Parliament by the Prime Minister by Command of Her Majesty, October 2010, p. 39. 65 Securing Britain in an Age of Uncertainty: The Strategic Defence and Security Review, Presented to Parliament by the Prime Minister by Command of Her Majesty, October 2010, pp. 5, 38-39. For more on the UK’s Dreadnought SSBN program as it existed prior to the October 2010 UK defense and security review report, see Richard Scott, “Deterrence At A Discount?” Jane’s Defence Weekly, December 23, 2009: 26-31. 66 Securing Britain in an Age of Uncertainty: The Strategic Defence and Security Review, Presented to Parliament by the Prime Minister by Command of Her Majesty, October 2010, p. 39. 67 PWR3 means pressurized water reactor, design number 3. U.S. and UK nuclear-powered submarines employ pressurized water reactors. Earlier UK nuclear-powered submarines are powered by reactor designs that the UK designated PWR-2 and PWR-1. For an article discussing the PWR3 plant, see Richard Scott, “Critical Mass: Re-Energising the UK’s Naval Nuclear Programme,” Jane’s International Defence Review, July 2014: 42-45, 47. 68 Sam LaGrone and Richard Scott, “Strategic Assets: Deterrent Plans Confront Cost Challenges,” Jane’s Navy International, December 2011: 17 and 18. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 33 US/UK 1958 Mutual Defence Agreement is a Government to Government Atomic Energy Act agreement that allows the exchange of naval nuclear propulsion technology between the US and UK. Under this agreement, Naval Reactors is providing the UK Ministry of Defence with US naval nuclear propulsion technology to facilitate development of the naval nuclear propulsion plant for the UK’s next generation SUCCESSOR ballistic missile submarine. The technology exchange is managed and led by the US and UK Governments, with participation from Naval Reactors prime contractors, private nuclear capable shipbuilders, and several suppliers. A UK based office comprised of about 40 US personnel provide full-time engineering support for the exchange, with additional support from key US suppliers and other US based program personnel as needed. The relationship between the US and UK under the 1958 mutual defence agreement is an ongoing relationship and the level of support varies depending on the nature of the support being provided. Naval Reactors work supporting the SUCCESSOR submarine is reimbursed by the UK Ministry of Defence.69 U.S. assistance to the UK on naval nuclear propulsion technology first occurred many years ago: To help jumpstart the UK’s nuclear-powered submarine program, the United States transferred to the UK a complete nuclear propulsion plant (plus technical data, spares, and training) of the kind installed on the U.S. Navy’s six Skipjack (SSN-585) class nuclear-powered attack submarines (SSNs), which entered service between 1959 and 1961. The plant was installed on the UK Navy’s first nuclear-powered ship, the attack submarine Dreadnought, which entered service in 1963. The December 2011 press report states that “the UK is also looking at other areas of cooperation between Dreadnought and the Ohio Replacement Programme. For example, a collaboration agreement has been signed off regarding the platform integration of sonar arrays with the respective combat systems.”70 A June 24, 2016, press report states the following: The [U.S. Navy] admiral responsible for the nuclear weapons component of ballistic missile submarines today praised the “truly unique” relationship with the British naval officers who have similar responsibilities, and said that historic cooperation would not be affected by Thursday’s vote to have the United Kingdom leave the European Union. Vice Adm. Terry Benedict, director of the Navy’s Strategic Systems Programs, said that based on a telephone exchange Thursday morning with his Royal Navy counterpart, “I have no concern.” The so-called Brexit vote—for British exit—“was a decision based on its relationship with Europe, not with us. I see yesterday’s vote having no effect.”71 69 Source: Email to CRS from Navy Office of Legislative Affairs, June 25, 2012. See also Jon Rosamond, “Next Generation U.K. Boomers Benefit from U.S. Relationship,” USNI News (http://news.usni.org), December 17, 2014. 70 Sam LaGrone and Richard Scott, “Strategic Assets: Deterrent Plans Confront Cost Challenges,” Jane’s Navy International, December 2011: 19. See also Jake Wallis Simons, “Brits Keep Mum on US Involvement in Trident Nuclear Program,” Politico, April 30, 2015. 71 Otto Kreisher, “Benedict: UK Exit From European Union Won’t Hinder Nuclear Sub Collaboration,” USNI News, June 24, 2016. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 34 Appendix C. Columbia-Class Program Origin and Milestones This appendix provides background information on the Columbia-class program’s origin and milestones. Program Origin and Early Milestones Although the eventual need to replace the Ohio-class SSBNs has been known for many years, the Columbia-class program can be traced more specifically to an exchange of letters in December 2006 between President George W. Bush and UK Prime Minister Tony Blair concerning the UK’s desire to participate in a program to extend the service life of the Trident II D-5 SLBM into the 2040s, and to have its next-generation SSBNs carry D-5s. Following this exchange of letters, and with an awareness of the projected retirement dates of the Ohio-class SSBNs and the time that would likely be needed to develop and field a replacement for them, DOD in 2007 began studies on a next-generation sea-based strategic deterrent (SBSD).72 The studies used the term sea-based strategic deterrent (SBSD) to signal the possibility that the new system would not necessarily be a submarine. An Initial Capabilities Document (ICD) for a new SBSD was developed in early 200873 and approved by DOD’s Joint Requirements Oversight Committee (JROC) on June 20, 2008.74 In July 2008, DOD issued a Concept Decision providing guidance for an analysis of alternatives (AOA) for the program; an acquisition decision memorandum from John Young, DOD’s acquisition executive, stated the new system would, barring some discovery, be a submarine.75 The Navy established an Columbia-class program office at about this same time.76 The AOA reportedly began in the summer or fall of 2008.77 The AOA was completed, with final brief to the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), on May 20, 2009. The final AOA report was completed in September 2009. An AOA Sufficiency Review Letter was signed by OSD’s Director, Cost Assessment & Program Evaluation (CAPE) on December 8, 2009.78 The AOA concluded that a new-design SSBN was the best option for replacing the Ohio-class SSBNs. (For 72 In February 2007, the commander of U.S. Strategic Command (STRATCOM) commissioned a task force to support an anticipated Underwater Launched Missile Study (ULMS). On June 8, 2007, the Secretary of the Navy initiated the ULMS. Six days later, the commander of STRATCOM directed that a Sea Based Strategic Deterrent (SBSD) capability-based assessment (CBA) be performed. In July 2007, the task force established by the commander of STRATCOM provided its recommendations regarding capabilities and characteristics for a new SBSD. (Source: Navy list of key events relating to the ULMS and SBSD provided to CRS and the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) on July 7, 2008.) 73 On February 14, 2008, the SBSD ICD was approved for joint staffing by the Navy’s Resources and Requirements Review Board (R3B). On April 29, 2008, the SBSD was approved by DOD’s Functional Capabilities Board (FCB) to proceed to DOD’s Joint Capabilities Board (JCB). (Source: Navy list of key events relating to the ULMS and SBSD provided to CRS and CBO on July 7, 2008.) 74 Navy briefing to CRS and CBO on the SBSD program, July 6, 2009. 75 Navy briefing to CRS and CBO on the SBSD program, July 6, 2009. 76 An August 2008 press report states that the program office, called PMS-397, “was established within the last two months.” (Dan Taylor, “Navy Stands Up Program Office To Manage Next-Generation SSBN,” Inside the Navy, August 17, 2008. 77 “Going Ballistic,” Defense Daily, September 22, 2008, p. 1. 78 Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 Budget Estimates, Navy, Justification Book Volume 2, Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Navy Budget Activity 4, entry for PE0603561N, Project 3220 (PDF page 345 of 888). Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 35 a June 26, 2013, Navy blog post discussing options that were examined for replacing the Ohio-class SSBNs, see Appendix D.) The program’s Milestone A review meeting was held on December 9, 2010. On February 3, 2011, the Navy provided the following statement to CRS concerning the outcome of the December 9 meeting: The OHIO Replacement Program achieved Milestone A and has been approved to enter the Technology Development Phase of the Dept. of Defense Life Cycle Management System as of Jan. 10, 2011. This milestone comes following the endorsement of the Defense Acquisition Board (DAB), chaired by Dr. Carter (USD for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics) who has signed the program’s Milestone A Acquisition Decision Memorandum (ADM). The DAB endorsed replacing the current 14 Ohio-class Ballistic Missile Submarines (SSBNs) as they reach the end of their service life with 12 Ohio Replacement Submarines, each comprising 16, 87-inch diameter missile tubes utilizing TRIDENT II D5 Life Extended missiles (initial loadout). The decision came after the program was presented to the Defense Acquisition Board (DAB) on Dec. 9, 2010. The ADM validates the program’s Technology Development Strategy and allows entry into the Technology Development Phase during which warfighting requirements will be refined to meet operational and affordability goals. Design, prototyping, and technology development efforts will continue to ensure sufficient technological maturity for lead ship procurement in 2019.79 January 2017 Milestone B Approval On January 4, 2017, DOD gave Milestone B approval to the Columbia-class program. Milestone B approval, which permits a program to enter the engineering and manufacturing development (EMD) phase, is generally considered a major milestone for a defense acquisition program, permitting the program to transition, in effect, from a research and development effort into a procurement program of record. A January 6, 2017, Navy notification to Congress on the Milestone B approval for the Columbia-class program states the following: On 4 November 2016, Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Frank Kendall chaired the Milestone B Defense Acquisition Board, and on 4 January, 2017 signed the acquisition decision memorandum approving COLUMBIA Class program’s Milestone B and designating the program as an Acquisition Category ID major defense acquisition program. Milestone B also establishes the Acquisition Program Baseline against which the program’s performance will be assessed. Additionally, this decision formally authorizes entry into the Engineering and Manufacturing Development Phase of an acquisition program, permitting the transition from preliminary design to detail design, using Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) funds. Cost estimates for this program have been rebaselined from CY2010 dollars to CY2017 dollars in accordance with DoDI 5000.02, Rev p, dated 7 January 2015. The MS B Navy Cost Estimate for Average Follow Ship End Cost (hulls 2-12) in 2010$ using specific shipbuilding indices is $5.0 billion, a $600 million reduction from the MS A estimate, which nearly achieves the affordability target of $4.9 billion set at MS A. To continue cost control, the Navy will focus on: • Stable operational and technical requirements • High design maturity at construction start 79 Source: Email from Navy Office of Legislative Affairs to CRS, February 3, 2011. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 36 • Detailed plans to ensure manufacturing readiness including robust prototyping efforts and synergies with other nuclear shipbuilding programs • Aggressive cost reduction actions Affordability caps have been assigned that are consistent with current cost estimates and reasonable margins for cost growth. Relative to Milestone A, these estimates have been updated to adjust Base Year from 2010 to 2017, a standard practice to match Base Year with the year of Milestone B approval. The MS A unit cost affordability target ($4.9 billion in CY2010$ using Navy indices) used a unique metric, “Average Follow-on Ship End Cost,” which accounted for hulls 2-12. From Milestone B forward, the affordability cap for the unit cost will be measured by using the Average Procurement Unit Cost (APUC), which includes all 12 hulls. The Affordability Cap of $8.0 billion in CY2017$ is based upon the approved APUC estimate of $7.3 billion plus 10%.... The Navy and industry are currently negotiating the detail design and construction (DD&C) contract, which is expected to award in early 2017. With negotiations continuing on the DD&C contract, the Navy has ensured the COLUMBIA Program design effort will continue without interruption. The Navy issued a contract modification to allow execution of SCN for detail design on the existing R&D contract. With this modification in place, detail design efforts that had initially planned to transition to the DD&C contract, will continue on the current R&D contract to ensure continued design progress. With the Milestone B approval and the appropriation of $773M in FY17 SCN under the second Continuing Resolution, funding is now available to execute detail design. In accordance with 10 U.S.C. §2218a and the FY17 National Defense Authorization Act, the Navy deposited the FY17 SCN into the National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund (NSBDF). The first installment of funding will be executed on the existing R&D contract, which allows transition into detail design and continued design progress until the award of the DD&C contract.80 80 Columbia Class MS [Milestone] B, Congressional Notification, January 6, 2017, pp. 1-2. See also Megan Eckstein, “Columbia-class Submarine Program Passess Milestone B Decision, Can Begin Detail Design,” USNI News, January 4, 2017. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 37 Appendix D. Design of Columbia-Class Boats This appendix provides additional background information on the design for the Columbia-class boats. Some Key Design Features The Columbia-class design will reflect the following:  The Columbia class is being designed for a 42-year expected service life.81  Unlike the Ohio-class design, which requires a midlife nuclear refueling,82 the Columbia class is to be equipped with a life-of-the-ship nuclear fuel core (a nuclear fuel core that is sufficient to power the ship for its entire expected service life).83 Although the Columbia class will not need a midlife nuclear refueling, it will still need a midlife nonrefueling overhaul (i.e., an overhaul that does not include a nuclear refueling) to operate over its full 42-year life.  The Columbia class is to be equipped with an electric-drive propulsion train, as opposed to the mechanical-drive propulsion train used on other Navy submarines. The electric-drive system is expected to be quieter (i.e., stealthier) than a mechanical-drive system.84  The Columbia class is to have SLBM launch tubes that are the same size as those on the Ohio class (i.e., tubes with a diameter of 87 inches and a length sufficient to accommodate a D-5 SLBM).  The Columbia class will have a beam (i.e., diameter)85 of 43 feet, compared to 42 feet on the Ohio-class design,86 and a length of 560 feet, the same as that of the Ohio-class design.87 81 Rear Admiral David Johnson, briefing to Naval Submarine League Annual Symposium [on] Expanding Undersea Dominance, October 23, 2014, briefing slide 19. See also William Baker et al., “Design for Sustainment: The Ohio Replacement Submarine,” Naval Engineers Journal, September 2015: 89-96. 82 As mentioned earlier (see “Current Ohio-Class SSBNs”), the Ohio-class boats receive a midlife nuclear refueling overhaul, called an Engineered Refueling Overhaul (ERO), which includes both a nuclear refueling and overhaul work on the ship that is not related to the nuclear refueling. 83 U.S. Navy, Report to Congress on Annual Long-Range Plan for Construction of Naval Vessels for FY 2011, February 2010, p. 5. 84 Source: Rear Admiral David Johnson, briefing to Naval Submarine League Annual Symposium [on] Expanding Undersea Dominance, October 23, 2014, briefing slide 19. See also the spoken testimony of Admiral Kirkland Donald, Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors, and Director, Naval Nuclear Propulsion, National Nuclear Security Administration, at a March 30, 2011, hearing before the Strategic Forces Subcommittee of the Senate Armed Services Committee, as shown in the transcript of the hearing, and Dave Bishop, “What Will Follow the Ohio Class?” U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, June 2012: 31; and Sam LaGrone and Richard Scott, “Strategic Assets: Deterrent Plans Confront Cost Challenges,” Jane’s Navy International, December 2011: 16. For more on electric drive propulsion, see CRS Report RL30622, Electric-Drive Propulsion for U.S. Navy Ships: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 85 Beam is the maximum width of a ship. For Navy submarines, which have cylindrical hulls, beam is the diameter of the hull. 86 Dave Bishop, “What Will Follow the Ohio Class?” U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, June 2012: 31. (Bishop was program manager for the Columbia-class program.) See also Sam LaGrone and Richard Scott, “Strategic Assets: Deterrent Plans Confront Cost Challenges,” Jane’s Navy International, December 2011: 15 and 16. 87 Sydney J. Freedberg, “Navy Seeks Sub Replacement Savings: From NASA Rocket Boosters To Reused Access Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 38  Instead of 24 SLBM launch tubes, as on the Ohio-class design, the Columbia class is to have 16 SLBM launch tubes.  As noted earlier, although the Columbia-class design has fewer SLBM tubes than the Ohio-class design, it is larger than the Ohio-class design in terms of submerged displacement. The Columbia-class design has a reported submerged displacement of 20,815 tons (as of August 2014), compared to 18,750 tons for the Ohio-class design.88 The Columbia-class design, like the Ohio-class design before it, will be the largest submarine ever built by the United States.  The Navy states that “owing to the unique demands of strategic relevance, [Columbia-class boats] must be fitted with the most up-to-date capabilities and stealth to ensure they are survivable throughout their full 40-year life span.”89 June 2013 Navy Blog Post Regarding Ohio Replacement Options A June 26, 2013, blog post by Rear Admiral Richard Breckenridge, the Navy’s Director for Undersea Warfare (N97), discussing options that were examined for replacing the Ohio-class SSBNs, stated the following: Over the last five years, the Navy–working with U.S. Strategic Command, the Joint Staff and the Office of the Secretary of Defense–has formally examined various options to replace the Ohio ballistic missile submarines as they retire beginning in 2027. This analysis included a variety of replacement platform options, including designs based on the highly successful Virginia-class attack submarine program and the current Ohio-class ballistic missile submarine. In the end, the Navy elected to pursue a new design that leverages the lessons from the Ohio, the Virginia advances in shipbuilding and improvements in cost-efficiency. Recently, a variety of writers have speculated that the required survivable deterrence could be achieved more cost effectively with the Virginia-based option or by restarting the Ohio-class SSBN production line. Both of these ideas make sense at face value–which is why they were included among the alternatives assessed–but the devil is in the details. When we examined the particulars, each of these options came up short in both military effectiveness and cost efficiency. Virginia-based SSBN design with a Trident II D5 missile. An SSBN design based on a Virginia-class attack submarine with a large-diameter missile compartment was rejected due to a wide range of shortfalls. It would: Doors,” Breaking Defense (http://breakingdefense.com), April 7, 2014. 88 Navy information paper on Columbia-class program dated August 11, 2014, provided to CBO and CRS on August 11, 2014. 89 U.S. Navy, Report to Congress on Annual Long-Range Plan for Construction of Naval Vessels for FY 2011, February 2010, p. 24. See also Mike McCarthy, “Navy Striving To Reduce Detectability Of Next Boomers,” Defense Daily, February 6, 2015: 1. In an article published in June 2012, the program manager for the Columbia-class program stated that “the current configuration of the Ohio replacement is an SSBN with 16 87-inch-diameter missile tubes, a 43-foot-diamater hull, electric-drive propulsion, [an] X-stern, accommodations for 155 personnel, and a common submarine radio room tailored to the SSBN mission.” (Dave Bishop, “What Will Follow the Ohio Class?” U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, June 2012: 31. See also Sam LaGrone and Richard Scott, “Strategic Assets: Deterrent Plans Confront Cost Challenges,” Jane’s Navy International, December 2011: 15 and 16. The X-stern is also shown in Rear Admiral David Johnson, briefing to Naval Submarine League Annual Symposium [on] Expanding Undersea Dominance, October 23, 2014, briefing slide 19.) The term X-stern means that the steering and diving fins at the stern of the ship are, when viewed from the rear, in the diagonal pattern of the letter X, rather than the vertical-and horizontal pattern of a plus sign (which is referred to as a cruciform stern). The common submarine radio room is a standardized (i.e., common) suite of submarine radio room equipment that is being installed on other U.S. Navy submarines. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 39 • Not meet survivability (stealth) requirements due to poor hull streamlining and lack of a drive train able to quietly propel a much larger ship • Not meet at-sea availability requirements due to longer refit times (since equipment is packed more tightly within the hull, it requires more time to replace, repair and retest) • Not meet availability requirements due to a longer mid-life overhaul (refueling needed) • Require a larger number of submarines to meet the same operational requirement • Reduce the deterrent value needed to protect the country (fewer missiles, warheads at-sea) • Be more expensive than other alternatives due to extensive redesign of Virginia systems to work with the large missile compartment (for example, a taller sail, larger control surfaces and more robust support systems) We would be spending more money (on more ships) to deliver less deterrence (reduced at-sea warhead presence) with less survivability (platforms that are less stealthy). Virginia-based SSBN design with a smaller missile. Some have encouraged the development of a new, smaller missile to go with a Virginia-based SSBN. This would carry forward many of the shortfalls of a Virginia-based SSBN we just discussed, and add to it a long list of new issues. Developing a new nuclear missile from scratch with an industrial base that last produced a new design more than 20 years ago would be challenging, costly and require extensive testing. We deliberately decided to extend the life of the current missile to decouple and de-risk the complex (and costly) missile development program from the new replacement submarine program. Additionally, a smaller missile means a shorter employment range requiring longer SSBN patrol transits. This would compromise survivability, require more submarines at sea and ultimately weaken our deterrence effectiveness. With significant cost, technical and schedule risks, there is little about this option that is attractive. Ohio-based SSBN design. Some have argued that we should re-open the Ohio production line and resume building the Ohio design SSBNs. This simply cannot be done because there is no Ohio production line. It has long since been re-tooled and modernized to build state-of-the-art Virginia-class SSNs using computerized designs and modular, automated construction techniques. Is it desirable to redesign the Ohio so that a ship with its legacy performance could be built using the new production facilities? No, since an Ohio-based SSBN would: • Not provide the required quieting due to Ohio design constraints and use of a propeller instead of a propulsor (which is the standard for virtually all new submarines) • Require 14 instead of 12 SSBNs by reverting to Ohio class operational availability standards (incidentally creating other issues with the New START treaty limits) • Suffer from reduced reliability and costs associated with the obsolescence of legacy Ohio system components Once again, the end result would necessitate procuring more submarines (14) to provide the required at-sea presence and each of them would be less stealthy and less survivable against foreseeable 21st century threats. The Right Answer: A new design SSBN that improves on Ohio: What has emerged from the Navy’s exhaustive analysis is an Ohio replacement submarine that starts with the foundation of the proven performance of the Ohio SSBN, its Trident II D5 strategic weapons system and its operating cycle. To this it adds: • Enhanced stealth as necessary to pace emerging threats expected over its service life Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 40 • Systems commonality with Virginia (pumps, valves, sonars, etc.) wherever possible, enabling cost savings in design, procurement, maintenance and logistics • Modular construction and use of COTS equipment consistent with those used in today’s submarines to reduce the cost of fabrication, maintenance and modernization. Total ownership cost reduction (for example, investing in a life-of-the-ship reactor core enables providing the same at-sea presence with fewer platforms). Although the Ohio replacement is a “new design,” it is in effect an SSBN that takes the best lessons from 50 years of undersea deterrence, from the Ohio, from the Virginia, from advances in shipbuilding efficiency and maintenance, and from the stern realities of needing to provide survivable nuclear deterrence. The result is a low-risk, cost-effective platform capable of smoothly transitioning from the Ohio and delivering effective 21st century undersea strategic deterrence.90 16 vs. 20 SLBM Tubes Overview The Navy’s decision to design Columbia-class boats with 16 SLBM tubes rather than 20 was one of several decisions the Navy made to reduce the estimated average procurement cost of boats 2 through 12 in the program toward a Navy target cost of $4.9 billion in FY2010 dollars.91 Some observers were concerned that designing the Columbia class with 16 tubes rather than 20 would create a risk that U.S. strategic nuclear forces might not have enough capability in the 2030s and beyond to fully perform their deterrent role. These observers noted that to comply with the New Start Treaty limiting strategic nuclear weapons, DOD plans to operate in coming years a force of 14 Trident SSBNs, each with 20 operable SLBM tubes (4 of the 24 tubes on each boat are to be rendered inoperable), for a total of 280 tubes, whereas the Navy in the Columbia-class program is 90 “Facts We Can Agree Upon About Design of Ohio Replacement SSBN,” Navy Live, accessed July 3, 2013, at http://navylive.dodlive.mil/2013/06/26/facts-we-can-agree-upon-about-design-of-ohio-replacement-ssbn/. 91 At a March 30, 2011, hearing before the Strategic Forces subcommittee of the Senate Armed Services Committee, Admiral Kirkland Donald, Deputy Administrator for Naval Reactors and Director, Naval Nuclear Propulsion, National Nuclear Security Administration, when asked for examples cost efficiencies that are being pursued in his programs, stated the following: The—the Ohio replacement [program] has been one that we’ve obviously been focused on here for—for several years now. But in the name of the efficiencies, and one of the issues as we work through the Defense Department’s acquisition process, we were the first program through that new process that Dr. [Aston] Carter [the DOD acquisition executive] headed up. But we were challenged to—to drive the cost of that ship down, and as far as our part was concerned, one of the key decisions that was made that—that helped us in that regard was a decision to go from 20 missile tubes to 16 missile tubes, because what that allowed us to do was to down rate the—the propulsion power that was needed, so obviously, it’s a–it’s a small[er] the reactor that you would need. But what it also allowed us to do was to go back [to the use of existing components]. The size [of the ship] fell into the envelope where we could go back and use components that we had already designed for the Virginia class [attack submarines] and bring those into this design, not have to do it over again, but several of the mechanical components, to use those over again. And it enabled us to drive the cost of that propulsion plant down and rely on proven technology that’s—pumps and valves and things like that don’t change like electronics do. So we’re pretty comfortable putting that in ship that’ll be around ‘til 2080. But we were allowed to do that. (Source: Transcript of hearing.) Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 41 planning a force of 12 SSBNs each with 16 tubes, for a total of 192 tubes, or about 31% less than 280. These observers also cited the uncertainties associated with projecting needs for strategic deterrent forces out to the year 2080, when the final Columbia-class boat is scheduled to leave service. These observers asked whether the plan to design the Columbia class with 16 tubes rather than 20 was fully supported within all parts of DOD, including U.S. Strategic Command (STRATCOM). In response, Navy and other DOD officials stated that the decision to design the Columbia class with 16 tubes rather than 20 was carefully considered within DOD, and that they believe a boat with 16 tubes will give U.S. strategic nuclear forces enough capability to fully perform their deterrent role in the 2030s and beyond. Testimony in 2011 At a March 1, 2011, hearing before the House Armed Services Committee, Admiral Gary Roughead, then-Chief of Naval Operations, stated the following: I’m very comfortable with where we're going with SSBN-X. The decision and the recommendation that I made with regard to the number of tubes—launch tubes are consistent with the new START treaty. They’re consistent with the missions that I see that ship having to perform. And even though it may be characterized as a cost cutting measure, I believe it sizes the ship for the missions it will perform.92 At a March 2, 2011, hearing before the Strategic Forces subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee, the following exchange occurred: REPRESENTATIVE TURNER: General Kehler, thank you so much for your continued thoughts and of course your leadership. One item that we had a discussion on was the triad, of looking to—of the Navy and the tube reductions of 20 to 16, as contained in other hearings on the Hill today. I would like your thoughts on the reduction of the tubes and what you see driving that, how you see it affecting our strategic posture and any other thoughts you have on that? AIR FORCE GENERAL C. ROBERT KEHLER, COMMANDER, U.S. STRATEGIC COMMAND Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, first of all, sir, let me say that the—in my mind anyway, the discussion of Trident and Ohio-class replacement is really a discussion in the context of the need to modernize the entire triad. And so, first of all, I think that it’s important for us to recognize that that is one piece, an important piece, but a piece of the decision process that we need to go through. Second, the issue of the number of tubes is not a simple black-and-white answer. So let me just comment here for a minute. First of all, the issue in my mind is the overall number of tubes we wind up with at the end, not so much as the number of tubes per submarine. Second, the issue is, of course, we have flexibility and options with how many warheads per missile per tube, so that’s another consideration that enters into this mixture. Another consideration that is important to me is the overall number of boats and the operational flexibility that we have with the overall number of boats, given that some number will need to be in maintenance, some number will need to be in training, et cetera. 92 Source: Transcript of hearing. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 42 And so those and many other factors—to include a little bit of foresight here, in looking ahead to 20 years from now in antisubmarine warfare environment that the Navy will have to operate in, all of those bear on the ultimate sideways shape configuration of a follow-on to the Ohio. At this point, Mr. Chairman, I am not overly troubled by going to 16 tubes. As I look at this, given that we have that kind of flexibility that I just laid out; given that this is an element of the triad and given that we have some decision space here as we go forward to decide on the ultimate number of submarines, nothing troubles me operationally here to the extent that I would oppose a submarine with 16 tubes. I understand the reasons for wanting to have 20. I understand the arguments that were made ahead of me. But as I sit here today, given the totality of the discussion, I am—as I said, I am not overly troubled by 16. Now, I don’t know that the gavel has been pounded on the other side of the river yet with a final decision, but at this point, I am not overly troubled by 16.93 At an April 5, 2011, hearing before the Strategic Forces subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee, the following exchange occurred: REPRESENTATIVE LARSEN: General Benedict, we have had this discussion, not you and I, I am sorry. But the subcommittee has had a discussion in the past with regards to the Ohio-class replacement program. The new START, though, when it was negotiated, assumed a reduction from 24 missile tubes per hole to, I think, a maximum a maximum of 20. The current configuration [for the Columbia class], as I understand it, would move from 24 to 16. Can you discuss, for the subcommittee here, the Navy’s rationale for that? For moving from 24 to 16 as opposed to the max of 20? NAVY REAR ADMIRAL TERRY BENEDICT, DIRECTOR, STRATEGIC SYSTEMS PROGRAMS (SSP): Sir, as part—excuse me, as part of the work-up for the milestone A [review for the Columbia class program] with Dr. Carter in OSD, SSP supported the extensive analysis at both the OSD level as well as STRATCOM’s analysis. Throughout that process, we provided, from the SWS [strategic weapon system] capability, our perspective. Ultimately that was rolled up into both STRATCOM and OSD and senior Navy leadership and in previous testimony, the secretary of the Navy, the CNO, and General Chilton have all expressed their confidence that the mission of the future, given their perspectives, is they see the environment today can be met with 16. And so, as the acquisition and the SWS provider, we are prepared to support that decision by leadership, sir. REPRESENTATIVE LARSEN: Yes. And your analysis supports—did your analysis that fed into this, did you look at specific numbers then? REARD ADMIRAL BENEDICT: 93 Source: Transcript of hearing. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 43 Sir, we looked at the ability of the system, again, SSP does not look at specific targets with... REPRESENTATIVE LARSEN: Right. Yes, yes, yes. REAR ADMIRAL BENEDICT: Our input was the capability of the missile, the number of re-entry bodies and the throw weight that we can provide against those targets and based on that analysis, the leadership decision was 16, sir.94 At an April 6, 2011, hearing before the Strategic Forces subcommittee of the Senate Armed Services Committee, the following exchange occurred: SENATOR SESSIONS: Admiral Benedict, according to recent press reports, the Navy rejected the recommendations of Strategic Command to design the next generation of ballistic missile submarines with 20 missile tubes instead of opting for only 16 per boat. What is the basis for the Navy’s decision of 16? And I'm sure cost is a factor. In what ways will that decision impact the overall nuclear force structure associated with the command? NAVY REAR ADMIRAL TERRY BENEDICT, DIRECTOR, STRATEGIC SYSTEMS PROGRAMS (SSP): Yes, sir. SSP supported the Navy analysis, STRATCOM’s analysis, as well as the OSD analysis, as we proceeded forward and towards the Milestone A decision [on the Columbia class program] that Dr. Carter conducted. Based on our input, which was the technical input as the—as the director of SSP, other factors were considered, as you stated. Cost was one of them. But as the secretary, as the CNO, and I think as General Kehler submitted in their testimony, that given the threats that we see today, given the mission that we see today, given the upload capability of the D-5, and given the environment as they saw today, all three of those leaders were comfortable with the decision to proceed forward with 16 tubes, sir. SENATOR SESSIONS: And is that represent your judgment? To what extent were you involved—were you involved in that? REAR ADMIRAL BENEDICT: Sir, we were involved from technical aspects in terms of the capability of the missile itself, what we can throw, our range, our capability. And based on what we understand the capability of the D-5 today, which will be the baseline missile for the Ohio Replacement Program, as the director of SSP I’m comfortable with that decision.95 Section 242 Report Section 242 of the FY2012 National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 1540/P.L. 112-81 of December 31, 2011) required DOD to submit a report on the Columbia-class program that includes, among other things, an assessment of various combinations of boat quantities and numbers of SLBM launch tubes per boat. The text of the section is as follows: 94 Source: Transcript of hearing. 95 Source: Transcript of hearing. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 44 SEC. 242. REPORT AND COST ASSESSMENT OF OPTIONS FOR OHIO-CLASS REPLACEMENT BALLISTIC MISSILE SUBMARINE. (a) Report Required- Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Navy and the Commander of the United States Strategic Command shall jointly submit to the congressional defense committees a report on each of the options described in subsection (b) to replace the Ohio-class ballistic submarine program. The report shall include the following: (1) An assessment of the procurement cost and total life-cycle costs associated with each option. (2) An assessment of the ability for each option to meet— (A) the at-sea requirements of the Commander that are in place as of the date of the enactment of this Act; and (B) any expected changes in such requirements. (3) An assessment of the ability for each option to meet— (A) the nuclear employment and planning guidance in place as of the date of the enactment of this Act; and (B) any expected changes in such guidance. (4) A description of the postulated threat and strategic environment used to inform the selection of a final option and how each option provides flexibility for responding to changes in the threat and strategic environment. (b) Options Considered- The options described in this subsection to replace the Ohio-class ballistic submarine program are as follows: (1) A fleet of 12 submarines with 16 missile tubes each. (2) A fleet of 10 submarines with 20 missile tubes each. (3) A fleet of 10 submarines with 16 missile tubes each. (4) A fleet of eight submarines with 20 missile tubes each. (5) Any other options the Secretary and the Commander consider appropriate. (c) Form- The report required under subsection (a) shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex. Subsection (c) above states the report “shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.” The report as submitted was primarily the classified annex, with a one-page unclassified summary, the text of which is as follows (underlining as in the original): The National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for Fiscal Year 2012 (FY12) directed the Secretary of the Navy and the Commander of U.S. Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM) to jointly submit a report to the congressional defense committees comparing four different options for the OHIO Replacement (OR) fleet ballistic missile submarine (SSBN) program. Our assessment considered the current operational requirements and guidance. The four SSBN options analyzed were: 1. 12 SSBNs with 16 missile tubes each 2. 10 SSBNs with 20 missile tubes each 3. 10 SSBNs with 16 missile tubes each 4. 8 SSBNs with 20 missile tubes each Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 45 The SSBN force continues to be an integral part of our nuclear Triad and contributes to deterrence through an assured second strike capability that is survivable, reliable, and credible. The number of SSBNs and their combined missile tube capacity are important factors in our flexibility to respond to changes in the threat and uncertainty in the strategic environment. We assessed each option against the ability to meet nuclear employment and planning guidance, ability to satisfy at-sea requirements, flexibility to respond to future changes in the postulated threat and strategic environment, and cost. In general, options with more SSBNs can be adjusted downward in response to a diminished threat; however, options with less SSBNs are more difficult to adjust upward in response to a growing threat. Clearly, a smaller SSBN force would be less expensive than a larger force, but for the reduced force options we assessed, they fail to meet current at-sea and nuclear employment requirements, increase risk in force survivability, and limit flexibility in response to an uncertain strategic future. Our assessment is the program of record, 12 SSBNs with 16 missile tubes each, provides the best balance of performance, flexibility, and cost meeting commander’s requirements while supporting the Nation’s strategic deterrence mission goals and objectives. The classified annex contains detailed analysis that is not releasable to the public.96 96 Report and Cost Assessment of Options for OHIO-Class Replacement Ballistic Missile Submarine, Unclassified Summary, received from Navy Legislative Affairs Office, August 24, 2012. See also Christopher J. Castelli, “Classified Navy Assessment On SSBN(X) Endorses Program Of Record,” Inside the Navy, September 10, 2012. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 46 Appendix E. National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund (NSBDF) This appendix provides additional background information on the National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund (NSBDF). Created by P.L. 113-291 Section 1022 of the Carl Levin and Howard P. “Buck” McKeon National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2015 (H.R. 3979/P.L. 113-291 of December 19, 2014) created the National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund (NSBDF), a fund in the DOD budget, codified at 10 U.S.C. 2218a, that is separate from the Navy’s regular shipbuilding account (which is formally known as the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy, or SCN, appropriation account). Amended by P.L. 114-92, P.L. 114-328, and P.L. 115-91 Section 1022 of the FY2016 National Defense Authorization Act (S. 1356/P.L. 114-92 of November 25, 2015), Section 1023 of the FY2017 National Defense Authorization Act (S. 2943/P.L. 114-328 of December 23, 2016), and Section 1022 of the FY2018 National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 2810/P.L. 115-91 of December 12, 2017) amended 10 U.S.C. 2218a to provide additional acquisition authorities for the NSBDF. Text as Amended The text of 10 U.S.C. 2218a, as amended, is as follows: §2218a. National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund (a) Establishment.-There is established in the Treasury of the United States a fund to be known as the “National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund”. (b) Administration of Fund.-The Secretary of Defense shall administer the Fund consistent with the provisions of this section. (c) Fund Purposes.-(1) Funds in the Fund shall be available for obligation and expenditure only for construction (including design of vessels), purchase, alteration, and conversion of national sea-based deterrence vessels. (2) Funds in the Fund may not be used for a purpose or program unless the purpose or program is authorized by law. (d) Deposits.-There shall be deposited in the Fund all funds appropriated to the Department of Defense for construction (including design of vessels), purchase, alteration, and conversion of national sea-based deterrence vessels. (e) Expiration of Funds After 5 Years.-No part of an appropriation that is deposited in the Fund pursuant to subsection (d) shall remain available for obligation more than five years after the end of fiscal year for which appropriated except to the extent specifically provided by law. (f) Authority to Enter Into Economic Order Quantity Contracts.-(1) The Secretary of the Navy may use funds deposited in the Fund to enter into contracts known as “economic order quantity contracts” with private shipyards and other commercial or government entities to achieve economic efficiencies based on production economies for major components or subsystems. The authority under this subsection extends to the procurement Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 47 of parts, components, and systems (including weapon systems) common with and required for other nuclear powered vessels under joint economic order quantity contracts. (2) A contract entered into under paragraph (1) shall provide that any obligation of the United States to make a payment under the contract is subject to the availability of appropriations for that purpose, and that total liability to the Government for termination of any contract entered into shall be limited to the total amount of funding obligated at time of termination. (g) Authority to Begin Manufacturing and Fabrication Efforts Prior to Ship Authorization.-(1) The Secretary of the Navy may use funds deposited into the Fund to enter into contracts for advance construction of national sea-based deterrence vessels to support achieving cost savings through workload management, manufacturing efficiencies, or workforce stability, or to phase fabrication activities within shipyard and manage sub-tier manufacturer capacity. (2) A contract entered into under paragraph (1) shall provide that any obligation of the United States to make a payment under the contract is subject to the availability of appropriations for that purpose, and that total liability to the Government for termination of any contract entered into shall be limited to the total amount of funding obligated at time of termination. (h) Authority to Use Incremental Funding to Enter Into Contracts for Certain Items.-(1) The Secretary of the Navy may use funds deposited into the Fund to enter into incrementally funded contracts for advance procurement of high value, long lead time items for nuclear powered vessels to better support construction schedules and achieve cost savings through schedule reductions and properly phased installment payments. (2) A contract entered into under paragraph (1) shall provide that any obligation of the United States to make a payment under the contract is subject to the availability of appropriations for that purpose, and that total liability to the Government for termination of any contract entered into shall be limited to the total amount of funding obligated at time of termination. (i) Authority for Multiyear Procurement of Critical Components to Support Continuous Production.-(1) To implement the continuous production of critical components, the Secretary of the Navy may use funds deposited in the Fund, in conjunction with funds appropriated for the procurement of other nuclear-powered vessels, to enter into one or more multiyear contracts (including economic ordering quantity contracts), for the procurement of critical contractor-furnished and Government-furnished components for critical components of national sea-based deterrence vessels. The authority under this subsection extends to the procurement of equivalent critical components common with and required for other nuclear-powered vessels. (2) In each annual budget request submitted to Congress, the Secretary shall clearly identify funds requested for critical components and the individual ships and programs for which such funds are requested. (3) Any contract entered into pursuant to paragraph (1) shall provide that any obligation of the United States to make a payment under the contract is subject to the availability of appropriations for that purpose and that the total liability to the Government for the termination of the contract shall be limited to the total amount of funding obligated for the contract as of the date of the termination. (j) Budget Requests.-Budget requests submitted to Congress for the Fund shall separately identify the amount requested for programs, projects, and activities for construction (including design of vessels), purchase, alteration, and conversion of national sea-based deterrence vessels. (k) Definitions.-In this section: Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 48 (1) The term “Fund” means the National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund established by subsection (a). (2) The term “national sea-based deterrence vessel” means any submersible vessel constructed or purchased after fiscal year 2016 that is owned, operated, or controlled by the Department of Defense and that carries operational intercontinental ballistic missiles. (3) The term “critical component” means any of the following: (A) A common missile compartment component. (B) A spherical air flask. (C) An air induction diesel exhaust valve. (D) An auxiliary seawater valve. (E) A hovering valve. (F) A missile compensation valve. (G) A main seawater valve. (H) A launch tube. (I) A trash disposal unit. (J) A logistics escape trunk. (K) A torpedo tube. (L) A weapons shipping cradle weldment. (M) A control surface. (N) A launcher component. (O) A propulsor. Precedents for Funding Navy Acquisition Programs Outside Navy Appropriation Accounts Prior to the establishment of the NSBDF, some observers had suggested funding the procurement of Columbia-class boats outside the Navy’s shipbuilding budget, so as to preserve Navy shipbuilding funds for other Navy shipbuilding programs. There was some precedent for such an arrangement  Construction of certain DOD sealift ships and Navy auxiliary ships was funded in past years in the National Defense Sealift Fund (NDSF), a part of DOD’s budget that is outside the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) appropriation account, and also outside the procurement title of the DOD appropriations act.  Most spending for ballistic missile defense (BMD) programs (including procurement-like activities) is funded through the Defense-Wide research and development and procurement accounts rather than through the research and development and procurement accounts of the individual military services. A rationale for funding DOD sealift ships in the NDSF had been that DOD sealift ships perform a transportation mission that primarily benefits services other than the Navy, and therefore should not be forced to compete for funding in a Navy budget account that funds the procurement of ships central to the Navy’s own missions. A rationale for funding BMD programs together in the Defense-Wide research and development account is that this makes potential trade-offs in Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 49 spending among various BMD programs more visible and thereby helps to optimize the use of BMD funding. Potential Implications of NSBDF on Funding Available for Other Programs The NSBDF has at least two potential implications for the impact that the Columbia-class program may have on funding available in coming years for other DOD acquisition programs  A principal apparent intent in creating the NSBDF is to help preserve funding in coming years for other Navy programs, and particularly Navy shipbuilding programs other than the Columbia-class program, by placing funding for the Columbia-class program in a location within the DOD budget that is separate from the Navy’s shipbuilding account and the Navy’s budget in general. Referring to the fund as a national fund and locating it outside the Navy’s budget appears intended to encourage a view (consistent with an argument made by supporters of the Columbia-class program that the program is intended to meet a national military need rather than a Navy-specific need) that funding for the Columbia-class program should be resourced from DOD’s budget as a whole, rather than from the Navy’s budget in particular.  The acquisition authorities in subsections (f), (g), (h), and (i) of 10 U.S.C. 2218a, which were added by P.L. 114-92 and P.L. 114-328, could marginally reduce the procurement costs of not only Columbia-class boats, but also other nuclear-powered ships, such as Virginia-class attack submarines and Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78) class aircraft carriers, by increasing economies of scale in the production of ship components and better optimizing ship construction schedules. The joint explanatory statement for the FY2016 National Defense Authorization Act (S. 1356/P.L. 114-92 of November 25, 2015) directed DOD to submit a report on the “acquisition strategy to build Ohio-class replacement submarines that will leverage the enhanced procurement authorities provided in the [NSBDF] ... .” Among other things, the report was to identify “any additional authorities the Secretary [of Defense] may need to make management of the Ohio-class replacement more efficient....”97 The Navy submitted the report on April 18, 2016. The report states in part that the high cost for this unique, next generation strategic deterrent requires extraordinary measures to ensure its affordability. Further, procuring the OHO Replacement (OR), the next generation SSBN, within the current shipbuilding plan presents an extreme challenge to the Navy’s shipbuilding budget. To minimize this challenge and reduce OR schedule risk, the Navy proposes to leverage those authorities provided by the National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund (NSBDF) in conjunction with the employment of best acquisition practices on this critical program.... ... the Navy is continuing to identify opportunities to further acquisition efficiency, reduce schedule risk, and improve program affordability. Most notably in this regard, the Navy is currently assessing [the concept of] Continuous Production [for producing components of Columbia-class boats more efficiently than currently scheduled] and will keep Congress 97 Joint explanatory statement for H.R. 1735, p. 165 (PDF page 166 of 542). Following the veto of H.R. 1735, a modified bill, S. 1356, was passed and enacted into law. Except for the parts of S. 1356 that differ from H.R. 1735, the joint explanatory statement for H.R. 1735 in effect serves as the joint explanatory statement for S. 1356. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 50 informed as we quantify the benefits of this and other initiatives that promise substantial savings.... ... the Navy’s initial assessment is that the authorities and further initiatives described [in this report] will be essential to achieving the reductions to acquisition cost and schedule risk that are so critical to success on the OR program.... Section 1022 of the FY2016 NDAA authorized the use of funds in the NSBDF to enter into contracts for EOQ [Economic Order Quantity purchases of materials and equipment] and AC [advance construction activities in shipyards], and to incrementally fund contracts for AP [advance procurement] of specific components. These authorities are essential to successfully executing the OR acquisition strategy. The Navy is able to take advantage of these authorities largely due to how its submarine shipbuilding plan is phased.... Economic Order Quantity contracts provide substantial cost savings to the Navy from procuring materials and equipment in bulk quantities. In addition to the cost savings typically associated with EOQ authority, the Navy has identified an opportunity to implement EOQ procurements to achieve OR schedule efficiencies and commonality contract actions with VCS [Virginia-class submarine] Block V [boats] and CVN [nuclear-powered aircraft carriers].... Advance Construction is the authority to begin [shipyard] construction [work] in fiscal years of AP [advance procurement] budget requests prior to the full funding/authorization year of a hull. Early manufacturing activities help retire construction risk for first-of-a-kind efforts, ease transition from design to production, and provide efficiencies in shipyard construction workload. Advance Construction would allow the shipbuilders to begin critical path construction activities earlier, thus reducing risk to the OR delivery schedule.... The FY2016 NDAA allows the Navy and shipbuilders to enter into incrementally funded procurements for long lead components that employ both AP and Full Funding (FF) SCN increments. This funding approach will provide significant schedule improvements and cost savings by maximizing the utilization of limited funding.... Maximum economic advantage can be obtained through Continuous Production. Procuring components and systems necessary for Continuous Production lines [as opposed to production lines that experience periods during which they are without work] would provide opportunities for savings through manufacturing efficiencies, increased [production-line] learning and the retention of critical production skills. In addition to lowering costs, Continuous Production would reduce schedule risk for both the U.S. and UK SSBN construction programs and minimize year-to-year funding spikes. To execute Continuous Production, the Navy requires authority to enter into contracts to procure contractor furnished and government furnished components and systems for OR SSBNs. OR Missile Tube and Missile Tube Module component procurement through Continuous Production lines have been identified as the most efficient and affordable procurement strategy.... Missile Tube Continuous Production could achieve an average reduction of 25 percent in Missile Tube procurement costs across the [Columbia] Class. These savings are compared to [the] single shipset procurement costs [that are] included in the PB17 PoR [the program of record reflected in the President’s (proposed) Budget for FY2017].... The Navy estimates that procuring Missile Tube Modules in Continuous Production lines would result in a cumulative one year schedule reduction in Missile Tube Module manufacturing for the OR Class. This schedule reduction, on a potential critical path assembly, would reduce ship delivery risk and increase schedule margin for follow ship deliveries. In addition to improving schedule, Missile Tube Module Continuous Production (including Strategic Weapon System (SWS) Government Furnished Equipment (GFE)) would produce savings as high as 20 percent compared to single shipset procurement costs included in the PB17 PoR. Executing Continuous Production of Missile Tubes or Missile Tube Modules requires re-phasing of funding from outside the PB17 Future Year’s Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service 51 Defense Program (FYDP) [to years that are within the FYDP] but results in significant overall program reductions. The Navy is evaluating additional Continuous Production opportunities for nuclear and nonnuclear components with common vendors required for VIRGINIA Class submarines and FORD Class aircraft carriers. Some examples include spherical air flasks, hull valves, pressure hull hemi heads, bow domes, castings, and torpedo tubes. The prerequisite to Continuous Production in each of these cases would be an affirmation of design stability consistent with completion of first article testing, or its equivalent.... The Navy’s position on the cost benefits of these authorities is not fully developed. However, the Congressional Budget Office stated in its Analysis of the Navy’s FY2016 Shipbuilding Plan, “ ... the Navy could potentially save several hundred million dollars per submarine by purchasing components and materials for several submarines at the same time.”... The Navy’s initial cost analysis aligns with CBO’s projections, and the cost reductions from employing these acquisition authorities will be further evaluated to support the Navy’s updated OR Milestone B cost estimate in August 2016.... The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics (USD AT&L) approved the OR Program Acquisition Strategy on January 4, 2016. This strategy emphasizes using alternative acquisition tools and cross-platform contracting to reduce schedule risk and lower costs in support of the Navy’s shipbuilding programs.... To reduce costs and help alleviate fiscal pressures, the Navy will work with Congress to implement granted authorities and explore the additional initiatives identified in this report.... The cost reductions from employing the granted and proposed acquisition authorities will be further evaluated to support the Navy’s updated OR Milestone B cost estimate in August 2016.... These authorities are needed with the National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund, RDTEN [research, development, test, and evaluation, Navy], and SCN appropriations accounts. Together, these acquisition tools will allow the Navy, and the shipbuilders, to implement the procurement strategy which will reduce total OR acquisition costs and shorten construction schedules for a program with no margin for delay.98 Author Information Ronald O'Rourke Specialist in Naval Affairs 98 U.S. Navy, Report to Congress on Ohio Replacement Acquisition Strategy and National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund Accountability, April 2016, with cover letters dated April 18, 2016, pp. 1-8. Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program Congressional Research Service R41129 · VERSION 179 · UPDATED 52 Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 		2020-05-01T14:03:27-0400
COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment—Overview of Issues and Further Reading for Congress COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment—Overview of Issues and Further Reading for Congress Updated May 8, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov R46336 Congressional Research Service SUMMARY COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment—Overview of Issues and Further Reading for Congress Some observers argue the COVID-19 pandemic could be a world-changing event with potentially profound and long-lasting implications for the international security environment and the U.S. role in the world. Other observers are more skeptical that the COVID-19 pandemic will have such effects. Observers who argue the COVID-19 pandemic could be world-changing for the international security environment and the U.S. role in the world have focused on several areas of potential change, including the following, which are listed here separately but overlap in some cases and can interact with one another:  world order, international institutions, and global governance;  U.S. global leadership and the U.S. role in the world;  China’s potential role as a global leader;  U.S. relations and great power competition with China and Russia, including the use of the COVID-19 pandemic as a theme or tool for conducting ideological competition;  the relative prevalence of democratic and authoritarian or autocratic forms of government;  societal tension, reform, transformation, and governmental stability in various countries;  the world economy, globalization, and U.S. trade policy;  the characteristics and conduct of conflict;  allied defense budgets and U.S. alliances;  the cohesion of the European Union;  the definition of, and budgeting for, U.S. national security;  U.S. defense strategy, defense budgets, and military operations;  U.S. foreign assistance programs and international debt relief;  activities of non-state actors;  the amount of U.S. attention devoted to ongoing international issues other than the COVID-19 pandemic; and  the role of Congress in setting and overseeing the execution of U.S. foreign and defense policy. Issues for Congress may include whether and how the COVID-19 pandemic could change the international security environment, whether the Trump Administration’s actions for responding to such change are appropriate and sufficient, and what implications such change could have for the role of Congress in setting and overseeing the execution of U.S. foreign and defense policy. Congress’s decisions regarding these issues could have significant and even profound implications for U.S. foreign and defense policy, and for the status of Congress as a co-equal branch relative to the executive branch in setting and overseeing the implementation of U.S. foreign and defense policy. R46336 May 8, 2020 Ronald O'Rourke Specialist in Naval Affairs Kathleen J. McInnis Specialist in International Security Michael Moodie Assistant Director and Senior Specialist in Foreign Affairs, Defense and Trade COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ................................................................................................................... 1 Overview of Potential Implications .................................................................................... 1 World Order, International Institutions, and Global Governance........................................ 1 U.S. Global Leadership and Role in the World ............................................................... 2 China’s Potential Role as a Global Leader ..................................................................... 2 U.S. Relations and Great Power Competition with China and Russia ................................. 2 Democracy, Authoritarianism, and Autocracy................................................................. 3 Societal Tension, Reform, and Transformation, and Governmental Stability ....................... 3 World Economy, Globalization, and U.S. Trade Policy .................................................... 3 Allied Defense Spending and U.S. Alliances .................................................................. 4 European Union ........................................................................................................ 4 Definition of, and Budgeting for, U.S. National Security.................................................. 4 U.S. Defense Strategy, Defense Budget, and Military Operations ...................................... 4 U.S. Foreign Assistance and International Debt Relief ..................................................... 5 Non-state Actors........................................................................................................ 5 U.S. Attention to International Issues Other than COVID-19 ............................................ 5 Role of Congress ....................................................................................................... 5 Further Reading ........................................................................................................ 5 Potential Issues for Congress ............................................................................................ 5 Appendixes Appendix A. Related CRS Reports..................................................................................... 7 Appendix B. Additional Writings ....................................................................................... 8 Contacts Author Information ....................................................................................................... 36 COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction Some observers argue the COVID-19 pandemic could be a world-changing event with potentially profound and long-lasting implications for the international security environment and the U.S. role in the world. Other observers are more skeptical that the COVID-19 pandemic will have such effects. This report provides a brief overview of some potential implications the COVID-19 pandemic might have for the international security environment and the U.S. role in the world, and a bibliography of CRS reports and other writings for further reading. Issues for Congress may include whether and how the COVID-19 pandemic could change the international security environment, whether the Trump Administration’s actions for responding to such change are appropriate and sufficient, and what implications such change could have for the role of Congress in setting and overseeing the execution of U.S. foreign and defense policy. Congress’s decisions regarding these issues could have significant and even profound implications for U.S. foreign and defense policy, and for the status of Congress as a co-equal branch relative to the executive branch in setting and overseeing the implementation of U.S. foreign and defense policy. Appendix A presents a list of CRS reports that provide more in-depth discussions of issues presented in this report. Appendix B presents a list of additional writings reflecting various perspectives on these issues. A separate CRS report discusses the question of whether the U.S. role in the world is changing as a result of factors other than the COVID-19 pandemic.1 Overview of Potential Implications Areas of potential change reflected in writings from observers who view the COVID-19 pandemic as a potentially world-changing event include but are not limited to those discussed below. Although these areas of potential change are presented separately, they overlap in some cases and can interact with one another. World Order, International Institutions, and Global Governance Some observers have focused on the possibility that the COVID-19 pandemic could cause or accelerate a decline or erosion in the U.S.-led liberal international order that has operated since World War II, in the international institutions and norms that contribute to it, and consequently in global governance.2 A decline or erosion in the U.S.-led liberal order or the international 1 CRS Report R44891, U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke and Michael Moodie. 2 For more on the U.S.-led liberal international order and the concept of world order generally, see CRS Report R44891, U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke and Michael Moodie. As discussed in that report, the term international order or world order generally refers in foreign policy discussions to the collection of organizations, institutions, treaties, rules, norms, and practices that are intended to organize, structure, and regulate international relations during a given historical period. Other terms used to refer to the U.S.-led liberal international order include postwar international order, rules-based international order, and open international order. Observers sometimes substitute world for international, or omit international or world and refer simply to the liberal order, the U.S.-led order, and so on. In the terms liberal international order and liberal order, the word liberal does not refer to the conservative-liberal construct often used in discussing contemporary politics in the United States or other countries. It is, instead, an older use of the term that refers to an order based on the rule of law, as opposed to an order based on the arbitrary powers of hereditary COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 2 institutions form part of it could set the stage for its replacement by a new or modified world order reflecting changed rules, norms, and practices, or by a more disorderly world. U.S. Global Leadership and Role in the World Some observers have focused on how, in their view, the COVID-19 pandemic is demonstrating that the United States is maintaining or reasserting its role as global leader, while other observers suggest that, in their view, the COVID-19 pandemic is demonstrating that the United States has chosen to withdraw from or is no longer capable of performing that role. The COVID-19 pandemic could influence discussions over the costs and benefits to the United States of acting as a global leader, not only with respect to global health but across a range of issues. Related to this, some observers have focused on how the COVID-19 pandemic may be illustrating the strengths or weaknesses of the Trump Administration’s “America First” approach to the U.S. role in the world, or the merits of the U.S. system of government and economic model as potential examples for other countries to emulate. China’s Potential Role as a Global Leader Some observers have focused on how the COVID-19 pandemic may be providing insight into whether China desires and is working to become a global leader on par with (or in the place of) the United States, whether China has a capacity for doing so, and how other countries might view China acting in such a role. China’s transparency, particularly regarding its actions in the early days of its COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan, as well as China’s so-called donation diplomacy or mask diplomacy—meaning China’s actions to send medical supplies and personnel to other countries, and the highlighting of these actions in statements from China’s government and state-controlled media—have become new elements of an ongoing discussion regarding China’s capacity or suitability for acting as a global leader. This ongoing discussion includes consideration of a range of other issues, including China’s actions for implementing its Belt and Road Initiative, China’s territorial disputes with other countries, its participation in international organizations, and its technology-development and international lending activities. U.S. Relations and Great Power Competition with China and Russia Some observers have focused on how the COVID-19 pandemic has become a significant element in U.S-China relations, and in U.S. great power competition with China and Russia, which the Trump Administration has placed at the center of its national security construct. For some observers, the COVID-19 pandemic presents an opportunity for U.S.-China cooperation on an important international issue of common interest. For other observers, the COVID-19 pandemic is a major new source of dispute and arena of competition between the two countries, and is causing U.S.-China relations to harden more fully into a Cold War-like adversarial situation. Some observers have focused on how the COVID-19 pandemic provides a prominent new factor in the discussion of whether the United States should decouple its economy from China’s and reduce its monarchs. Though often referred to as if it is a fully developed or universally established situation, the liberal international order, like other international orders that preceded it , is incomplete in geographic reach and in other ways; partly aspirational; not fixed in stone, but rather subject to evolution over time; sometimes violated by its supporters; not entirely free of might-makes-right behavior; resisted or rejected by certain states and non-state actors; and subject to various stresses and challenges. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 3 dependence on China for key materials and products, including hospital supplies and pharmaceuticals. Some observers have focused on whether the U.S. and Chinse responses to the COVID-19 pandemic will affect views around the world regarding the relative merits of the U.S. and Chinese forms of government and economic models as potential examples to emulate. Democracy, Authoritarianism, and Autocracy Related to the point above about forms of government, some observers have focused on how the COVID-19 pandemic appears to be challenging democratic systems in various countries and providing national leaders with an opportunity or rationale for taking actions to seize greater power and move their countries away from democracy and toward authoritarianism or autocracy, or strengthen or consolidate their already-existing authoritarian or autocratic forms of government.3 As discussed in another CRS report, a key element of the traditional U.S. role in the world since World War II has been to defend and promote freedom, democracy, and human rights as universal values, while criticizing and resisting authoritarian and illiberal forms of government where and when possible.4 Societal Tension, Reform, and Transformation, and Governmental Stability Beyond the specific point above about potential movement toward greater authoritarianism and autocracy, some observers have focused on the possibility that the COVID-19 pandemic more generally could cause increased social tensions in certain countries, could lead to (or present opportunities for) societal reforms and transformations, and could destabilize and perhaps cause the downfall of governments, akin to the effects of certain past world-changing events, such as World War I.5 Such changes could alter the political orientations, national strategies, foreign policies, and defense policies of the countries in which they occur, potentially inducing follow-on effects among governments and other global actors that interact with those countries. World Economy, Globalization, and U.S. Trade Policy Some observers have focused on the possibility that the COVID-19 pandemic could lead to significant and potentially long-lasting changes to the world economy that in turn could reshape the international security environment. Among other things, observers have focused on the possibility that the COVID-19 situation could be leading the world economy into a significant 3 For additional discussion of the issue of the prevalence of democracy and authoritarian or autocratic forms of government around the world, see CRS Report R45344, Global Trends in Democracy: Background, U.S. Policy, and Issues for Congress, by Michael A. Weber. 4 See CRS Report R44891, U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke and Michael Moodie. 5 For brief discussions of the impacts of World War I on societies and governments, see, for example, Robert Wilde, “The Consequences of World War I, Political and Social Effects of the War to End All Wars,” ThoughtCo., July 10, 2019; John Horne, “The First World War: the Aftermath, The Years Following the End of the War Were Marked by More Wars, Political Upheaval and Deep Social Change,” Irish Times, April 24, 2018; Steven Mintz, “ Historical Context: The Global Effect of World War I,” History Now (Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History) , undated, accessed April 16, 2020; Margaret MacMillan, “World War I: The War That Changed Everything,” Wall Street Journal, June 20, 2014; Steven Erlanger, “ The War to End All Wars? Hardly. But It Did Change Them Forever.” New York Times, June 26, 2014; Jay Winter, “ How the Great War Shaped the World,” Atlantic, World War I issue (September 29, 2014); Kathleen Haley, “100 Years after WWI: The Lasting Impacts of the Great War ,” Media, Law & Policy (Syracuse University), July 28, 2014; “Aftermath of World War I,” Wikipedia, updated April 11, 2020, accessed April 16, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 4 recession—an effect that could contribute to the societal tensions mentioned in the previous point. Noting that the COVID-19 pandemic has reduced world trade volumes and disrupted global supply chains, they have focused on the question of whether economic globalization will as a result be slowed, halted, or reversed. Observers are monitoring how such effects could influence or be influenced by U.S. trade policy. Allied Defense Spending and U.S. Alliances The so-called burden-sharing issue—that is, the question of whether U.S. allies are shouldering a sufficient share of the collective allied defense burden—has long been a point of contention between the United States and its allies around the globe, and it has been a matter of particular emphasis for the Trump Administration. Some observers have focused on the possibility that the costs that U.S. allies are incurring to support their economies during stay-at-home/lockdown periods will lead to offsetting reductions in their defense expenditures. Some observers argue that the NATO allies in Europe in particular may experience contractions in their defense budgets for this reason. More generally, some observers argue that if the COVID-19 pandemic causes a global recession, allied defense budgets could be further reduced—a potential impact that could affect not only NATO allies in Europe, but those in Asia as well. European Union Some observers have additionally focused on the question of whether the COVID-19 pandemic is creating tensions among the European Union member states, particularly in connection with actions they are taking to close their national borders, and what impact the COVID-19 pandemic might ultimately have on the cohesion of the European Union. Definition of, and Budgeting for, U.S. National Security Some observers have focused on the question of whether the COVID-19 situation will (or should) lead to a revised definition of U.S. national security, particularly one that is less military-centric and more focused on what are sometimes called human-security-oriented challenges or global issues, such as climate change, that are currently more at the periphery of U.S. national security policy and plans. Such a change in definition could lead to a changed allocation of funding between the Department of Defense (DOD) and other government agencies that perform national-security-related tasks, a realignment of resources within DOD between combat-oriented programs and other programs (such as those related to DOD’s mission of providing defense support of civil authorities), and perhaps a changed allocation of funding among the agencies other than DOD that perform national-security-related tasks. U.S. Defense Strategy, Defense Budget, and Military Operations Some observers have focused on the question of whether the large federal expenditures being made in response to the domestic U.S. economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the impact these expenditures will have on the federal budget deficit and federal debt, could lead to greater constraints in coming years on U.S. defense spending levels. As a follow-on matter, these observers are additionally focusing on the question of whether responding to such increased constraints will (or should) lead to revisions in U.S. defense strategy, changes in U.S. defense programs, and a reduction or termination of certain overseas U.S. military operations. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 5 U.S. Foreign Assistance and International Debt Relief Some observers have focused on the question of whether the COVID-19 pandemic is providing a new lens through which to measure the value of U.S. foreign assistance and international debt relief in promoting U.S. interests, particularly in connection with the previously mentioned issue of whether to revise the definition of U.S. national security to make it less military-centric. Non-state Actors Some observers have focused on how non-state actors such as international terrorist and criminal organizations are reacting to the COVID-19 pandemic, and on how much priority should be given to countering such actors in the future, particularly in a context of a changed definition of U.S. national security. U.S. Attention to International Issues Other than COVID-19 Some observers have focused on whether responding to the COVID-19 pandemic is affecting the time and resources that U.S. leaders and agencies can devote to addressing other international issues of concern to the United States that predate but continue to exist in parallel with the COVID-19 pandemic. Administration officials have warned other countries to not take actions during the COVID-19 pandemic to challenge U.S. interests around the world or otherwise test U.S. resolve or responsiveness on the thinking that the COVID-19 pandemic is distracting U.S. officials from other concerns or reducing U.S. capacity for responding to any such challenges. Role of Congress At least one observer has focused on the issue of how the COVID-19 pandemic has affected the ability of Congress to conduct oversight of the Administration’s foreign policy actions. Further Reading For further reading on the issues outlined above, see the CRS reports presented in Appendix A and the additional writings presented in Appendix B. Potential Issues for Congress Potential issues for Congress regarding implications of the COVID-19 pandemic for the international security environment and the U.S. role in the world include but are not limited to the following:  Will the COVID-19 pandemic change the international security environment, and if so, in what ways? How clearly can potential changes be anticipated?  How should the United States respond to potential changes in the international security environment arising from the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects, particularly in light of uncertainty regarding the precise nature and likelihood of these changes? How might U.S. action or inaction influence or accelerate these changes?  What actions is the Administration developing to respond to potential changes in the international security environment arising from the COVID-19 pandemic? COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 6 Does Congress have sufficient visibility into these actions? Are these actions appropriate and sufficient? What metrics should Congress use to assess them?  What implications do potential changes in the international security environment arising from the COVID-19 pandemic have for the role of Congress in setting and overseeing the execution of U.S. foreign and defense policy? Is Congress appropriately organized for maintaining Congress as a co-equal branch of government relative to the executive branch in addressing these potential changes? If the COVID-19 pandemic becomes a world-changing event for the international security environment and the U.S. role in the world, what implications, if any, might that have for congressional organization and operations? COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 7 Appendix A. Related CRS Reports CRS reports that provide more in-depth discussions of specific issues discussed in this report include the following, which are presented in alphabetical order of their titles:  CRS In Focus IF11496, COVID-19 and Foreign Assistance: Issues for Congress, by Nick M. Brown, Marian L. Lawson, and Emily M. Morgenstern.  CRS Insight IN11288, COVID-19 and the Defense Industrial Base: DOD Response and Legislative Considerations, by Heidi M. Peters.  CRS Insight IN11279, COVID-19 and U.S. Iran Policy, by Kenneth Katzman.  CRS Legal Sidebar LSB10424, COVID-19: An Overview of Trade-Related Measures to Address Access to Medical Goods, by Nina M. Hart.  CRS Report R46304, COVID-19: China Medical Supply Chains and Broader Trade Issues, coordinated by Karen M. Sutter.  CRS Insight IN11305, COVID-19: Defense Support of Civil Authorities, by Lawrence Kapp and Alan Ott.  CRS In Focus IF11421, COVID-19: Global Implications and Responses, by Sara M. Tharakan et al.  CRS Insight IN11280, COVID-19: Industrial Mobilization and Defense Production Act (DPA) Implementation, by Michael H. Cecire and Heidi M. Peters.  CRS Legal Sidebar LSB10436, COVID-19: International Trade and Access to Pharmaceutical Products, by Nina M. Hart.  CRS In Focus IF11434, COVID-19: U.S.-China Economic Considerations, by Karen M. Sutter and Michael D. Sutherland.  CRS Report R46270, Global Economic Effects of COVID-19, coordinated by James K. Jackson.  CRS In Focus IF11480, Overview: The Department of Defense and COVID-19, coordinated by Kathleen J. McInnis.  CRS Insight IN11231, The Defense Production Act (DPA) and COVID-19: Key Authorities and Policy Considerations, by Michael H. Cecire and Heidi M. Peters.  CRS Insight IN11337, The Defense Production Act (DPA) and the COVID-19 Pandemic: Recent Developments and Policy Considerations, by Michael H. Cecire and Heidi M. Peters.  CRS Insight IN11325, U.S. Travel and Tourism and COVID-19, by Michaela D. Platzer. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 8 Appendix B. Additional Writings In presenting sources of additional reading, this appendix includes some examples of writings reflecting various perspectives on the potential implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on the international security environment and the U.S. role in the world, organized by specific themes or topics. Within each section, the items are presented in chronological order, with the most recent on top. General/Multitopic Edith M. Lederer, “UN Chief Says Pandemic Is Unleashing a ‘Tsunami of Hate,’” Associated Press, May 8, 2020. Nikolas K. Gvosdev, “Why the Coronavirus Won't Transform International Affairs Like 9/11 Did,” National Interest, May 5, 2020. Deepanshu Mohan, “The Geopolitical Contours of a Post-COVID-19 World,” East Asia Forum, May 2, 2020. Andrew Ehrhardt, “Disease and Diplomacy in the 19th Century,” War on the Rocks, April 30, 2019. Dmitri K. Simes, “The Perfect Storm,” National Interest, April 24, 2020. Fred Kaplan, “What Happens if Oil Doesn’t Recover? If Demand Doesn’t Pick Up This Summer, We Could See Major Shifts in Global Power,” Slate, April 23, 2020. Barry R. Posen, “Do Pandemics Promote Peace? Why Sickness Slows the March to War,” Foreign Affairs, April 23, 2020. Joseph Cirincione, “How to Prevent War During the Coronavirus Pandemic, How Will the Coronavirus Threaten Global Peace?” National Interest, April 22, 2020. Frank Hoffman, “An American Perspective on Post-Pandemic Geopolitics,” RUSI, April 20, 2020. Gordon Bardos, “Will the Coronavirus Crisis Force America to Look in the Mirror and Reform?” National Interest, April 18, 2020. Nicholas Eberstadt, “The “New Normal”: Thoughts about the Shape of Things to Come in the Post-Pandemic World,” National Bureau of Asian Research, April 18, 2020. Steve Coll, “Woodrow Wilson’s Case of the Flu, and How Pandemics Change History,” New Yorker, April 17, 2020. Jackson Diehl, “The Pandemic Is Killing Truth, Too,” Washington Post, April 12, 2020. Edith M. Lederer, “UN Chief Warns COVID-19 Threatens Global Peace and Security,” Associated Press, April 10, 2020. Stratfor Worldview, “How the Coronavirus Pandemic Is Changing the World—and the Future,” National Interest, April 4, 2020. Daniel W. Drezner, “The Most Counterintuitive Prediction about World Politics and the Coronavirus, What If Nothing Changes?” Washington Post, March 30, 2020. Ali Demirdas, “Western Values May Not Survive the Coronavirus. European Unity and American Military Power Just Haven’t Held Up,” National Interest, March 28, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 9 John Allen et al., “How the World Will Look after the Coronavirus Pandemic,” Foreign Policy, March 20, 2020. (Includes short contributions from 12 authors.) Maxine Whittaker, “How Infectious Diseases Have Shaped Our Culture, Habits and Language,” The Conversation, July 12, 2017. World Order, International Institutions, and Global Governance Edward Fishman, “The World Order Is Dead. Here’s How to Build a New One for a Post-Coronavirus Era,” Politico, May 3, 2020. Rebecca Wolfe and Hilary Matfess Sunday, “COVID and Cooperation: The Latest Canary in the Coal Mine,” Lawfare, May 3, 2020. Joshua Keating, “The Decline of the Nation-State, Trump’s War with the Governors Hints at a New Political Order,” Foreign Policy, April 29, 2020. Yukon Huang and Jeremy Smith, “Pandemic Response Reflects Unlearned Lessons of U.S.-China Trade War,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, April 27, 2020. Mihir Sharma, “Diplomacy Is Another Victim of the Virus,” Bloomberg, April 26, 2020. Brahma Chellaney, “The WHO Has Failed the World in its Pandemic Response,” Strategist (Australian Strategic Policy Institute), April 23, 2020. William C. Danvers, “The World Bank steps up its role in fighting for the future,” The Hill, April 22, 2020. Eric A. Posner, “The Limits of the World Health Organization,” Lawfare, April 21, 2020. Amitav Acharya, “How Coronavirus May Reshape the World Order,” National Interest, April 18, 2020. Joseph S. Nye Jr., “No, the Coronavirus Will Not Change the Global Order,” Foreign Policy, April 16, 2020. Karen DeYoung and Liz Sly, “Global Institutions Are Flailing in the Face of the Pandemic,” Washington Post, April 15, 2020. Colin H. Kahl and Ariana Berengaut, “Aftershocks: The Coronavirus Pandemic and the New World Disorder,” War on the Rocks, April 10, 2020. Lanhee J. Chen, “Lost in Beijing: The Story of the WHO, China Broke the World Health Organization. The U.S. Has to Fix It or Leave and Start Its Own Group,” Wall Street Journal, April 8, 2020. Colum Lynch, “Can the United Nations Survive the Coronavirus? In the Absence of U.S. Leadership, the U.N. Is Struggling to Carve Out a Role in the Face of What May Be the Greatest Threat Since Its Founding,” Foreign Policy, April 8, 2020. Timofey V. Bordachev, “Visions Of The Post-Coronavirus World: Russian Expert On Europe Bordachev: The Liberal World Order Will Not Survive,” MEMRI, April 6, 2020. Matthew Lee and Edith M. Lederer, “Global Diplomacy Under the Gun in The Time of Ccoronavirus,” Associated Press, April 4, 2020. Thomas Wright, “Stretching the International Order to Its Breaking Point, The Greatest Error That Geopolitical Analysts Can Make May Be Believing That the Crisis Will Be Over in Three to Four Months,” Atlantic, April 4, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 10 Henry A. Kissinger, “The Coronavirus Pandemic Will Forever Alter the World Order,” Wall Street Journal, April 3, 2020. Ryan Broderick, “After The Coronavirus Passes, Your World Will Not Go Back To Normal, Before the Pandemic Began, the Systems That Govern Our World Were Brittle. Today, They Are Broken. When We Emerge, the World Will Be Different, and So Will We,” Buzzfeed News, April 2, 2020. Rick Gladstone, “U.N. Security Council ‘Missing In Action’ in Coronavirus Fight,” New York Times, April 2, 2020. Ian Goldin and Robert Muggah, “End of International Cooperation? How Coronavirus Has Changed the World Permanently,” National Interest, March 31, 2020. U.S. Global Leadership and Role in World Jose W. Fernandez, “In the Coronavirus Era, Trump’s ‘America First’ Means ‘Latin America Alone,’” Foreign Policy, May 7, 2020. Drew Hinshaw and Lukas I. Alpert, “U.S. Makes Diplomatic Push for Taiwan to Attend WHO Summit,” Wall Street Journal, May 7, 2020. Fred Kaplan, “Trump’s Medical Nationalism Will Make It Harder to Defeat COVID-19,” Slate, May 7, 2020. William Booth, Carolyn Y. Johnson, and Carol Morello, “The World Came Together for a Virtual Vaccine Summit. The U.S. Was Conspicuously Absent,” Washington Post, May 4, 2020. Matthew Petti, “Trump Administration Defends No-Show At Global Coronavirus Conference,” National Interest, May 4, 2020. Anne Applebaum, “The Rest of the World Is Laughing at Trump, The President Created a Leadership Vacuum. China Intends to Fill It,” Atlantic, May 3, 2020. Charlotte Klein, “Trump’s ‘America First’ Mentality May Hamper Global Race For Coronavirus Vaccine,” Vanity Fair, May 3, 2020. Nahal Toosi and Natasha Bertrand, “Fears Rise that Trump Will Incite a Global Vaccine Brawl, The President’s ‘America First’ Philosophy Courts Disaster for Entire Regions of the World, Diplomats Warn,” Politico, May 3, 2020. Kori Schake, “America’s Built-in Protection Against Bad Leadership, For All Its Failures, the U.S. Has Structural Advantages Over Rival Powers—and Will Come Out of the Pandemic Even Stronger,” Atlantic, May 1, 2020. Colum Lynch, “WHO Becomes Battleground as Trump Chooses Pandemic Confrontation Over Cooperation,” Foreign Policy, April 29, 2020. J. Stephen Morrison and Anna Carroll, “WHO and President Trump on the Ledge,” Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), April 28, 2020. Jeffrey Becker, “COVID-19 Offers a Golden Opportunity to Reengage with the Indo-Pacific,” Defense One, April 27, 2020. Joseph S. Nye, “How COVID-19 Is Testing American Leadership,” East Asia Forum, April 26, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 11 By John Hudson, Josh Dawsey, and Souad Mekhennet, “Trump Expands Battle with WHO Far Beyond Aid Suspension,” Washington Post, April 25, 2020. Katrin Bennhold, “‘Sadness’ and Disbelief From a World Missing American Leadership,” New York Times, April 23, 2020. David Brunnstrom and Humeyra Pamuk, “Pompeo Says U.S. May Never Restore WHO Funds after Cutoff over Pandemic,” Reuters, April 23, 2020. Julianne Smith and Garima Mohan, “In a Crisis, a Fumbling America Confirms Europe’s Worst Fears,” War on the Rocks, April 23, 2020. Luke Allen, “Why Trump Defunded the WHO,” National Interest, April 20, 2020. Yu-Jie Chen and Jerome A. Cohen, “Trump Is Right That the WHO Has a China Problem. Cutting Funding Isn’t the Answer,” Diplomat, April 20, 2020. Jeffrey Cimmino, “Trump Should Be Tough On the WHO – And Recommit to Strengthening Global Health Security,” National Interest, April 19, 2020. Brett D. Schaefer, “The World Health Organization Messed Up—But Don't Defund Them,” National Interest, April 16, 2020. Salvatore Babones, “Donald Trump Is Right To Dump the WHO,” National Interest, April 15, 2020. Kevin Baron, “Don’t Be Fooled. Trump’s Cuts to WHO Aren’t About the Coronavirus,” Defense One, April 15, 2020. Bonnie Kristian, “The Coronavirus Shows How US ‘Diplomacy’ Is Anything But, Absolutist, America-First Approaches Isolate Us and Make Us Less Safe,” Defense One, April 15, 2020. Eli Lake, “Trump Is Punishing the WHO for China’s Deceptions,” Bloomberg, April 15, 2020. Thomas R. Pickering and Atman Trivedi, “America First? The Coronavirus Couldn’t Care Less,” Foreign Policy, April 15, 2020. Emily Rauhala, “Trump’s Critique of WHO May Be a Diversion, But It Resonates Beyond the White House,” Washington Post, April 15, 2020. Steve Holland, “Trump to Convene G7 Leaders in Video Call to Discuss Pandemic,” Reuters, April 14, 2020. Fred Kaplan, “The End of American Leadership, The Coronavirus Pandemic May Mark the Final Shift of Global Power Away from the United States,” Slate, April 13, 2020. Michael Shoebridge, “Why America Will Emerge Stronger From the Coronavirus Crisis,” National Interest, April 12, 2020. Bill Ong Hing, “Trump Has Achieved His Goal of Abolishing Asylum, The Pandemic Has Added One More Insurmountable Hurdle for Asylum Seekers,” Slate, April 10, 2020. Michèle A. Flournoy and Lisa O. Monaco, “Now’s Not the Time for Isolationism, Countries Need to Work Together to Fight Coronavirus, and the U.S. Should Step Up to Lead Those Efforts, Not Back Off From Them,” Politico, April 8, 2020. Todd Prince, “Pompeo Touts U.S. Foreign Help Against Pandemic As Trump Threatens WHO Funding,” Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, April 8, 2020. Joe Buccino, “The US Must Lead the World Out of This, If the Coronavirus Pandemic Only Causes Us to Look Inward, China Wins,” Defense One, April 7, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 12 Helle C. Dale, “Even in Pandemic, America Still the Global Leader,” Heritage Foundation, April 7, 2020. John Pomfret, “Does the Future Still Belong to the U.S. and China?” Washington Post, April 7, 2020. Robert B. Zoellick, “The World Is Watching How America Handles Coronavirus, The Trump Administration Has Failed to Convey An Impression of Strong International Leadership,” Wall Street Journal, April 7, 2020. Ted Anthony, “After Virus, How Will Americans’ View of the World Change?” Washington Post, April 6, 2020. William J. Burns, “A Make-or-Break Test for American Diplomacy, The Post-Pandemic World Will Pose a Massive Test for U.S. Statecraft, the Biggest Since the End of the Cold War,” Atlantic, April 6, 2020. Victor Davis Hanson, “Don’t Be Fooled: Trump Is Leading the World Against Coronavirus,” National Interest, April 5, 2020. Lara Jakes, “When the Face of America Falls Ill: A Virus’s Toll on Diplomats,” New York Times, April 4, 2020. Nahal Toosi, “‘Lord of the Flies: PPE Edition’: U.S. Cast As Culprit in Global Scrum Over Coronavirus Supplies,” Politico, April 3, 2020. Stephen M. Walt, “The United States Can Still Win the Coronavirus Pandemic,” Foreign Policy, April 3, 2020. Susan B. Glasser, “The Coronavirus Is the World’s Only Superpower, Trump’s America? Not so Much,” New Yorker, April 2, 2020. Robbie Gramer and Colum Lynch, “In Global Leadership Void on Pandemic, Critics Ask: Where’s Pompeo?” Foreign Policy, April 2, 2020. Ash Jain, “Trump Just Missed a Perfect Opportunity to Reassert American Leadership, The G-20 helped beat Ebola. Why can’t it do the same for the coronavirus?” Foreign Policy, April 2, 2020. Adam Tooze, “America Is Ailing—and Leading the World, The Coronavirus Pandemic Has Been a Humiliation for the United States—and Confirmation of Its Unmatched International Power,” Foreign Policy, April 1, 2020. Robert C. Rubel, “Canary In The Coal Mine: The US Navy’s Dilemmas As An Indication Of A Culminating Point In National Grand Strategy,” Journal of Political Risk , April 2020. Doug Bandow, “Donald Trump Needs to Focus on Coronavirus (Not Fighting with China and the EU),” National Interest, March 30, 2020. Walter Russell Mead, “U.S. Leadership Will Survive Coronavirus,” Wall Street Journal, March 30, 2020. Michael Rubin, “Washington Post’s Broadside against Mike Pompeo Is Wildly Unfair,” Washington Examiner, March 30, 2020. (Responds to the March 29, 2020, writing below by Jackson Diehl.) Jeff M. Smith, “How America Is Leading the ‘Quad Plus’ Group of Seven Countries in Fighting the Coronavirus,” National Interest, March 30, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 13 Jackson Diehl, “Pompeo’s Pandemic Performance Ensures His Place Among the Worst Secretaries of State Ever,” Washington Post, March 29, 2020. (For a response, see the March 30, 2020, writing above by Michael Rubin.) Brett McGurk, “America Should Build an International Coalition Now; The United States Has an Urgent Interest in Filling the Global Leadership Void During This Stateless Scourge,” Atlantic, March 29, 2020. Ted Galen Carpenter, “Donald Trump Offered to Help North Korea on Coronavirus. Why Not Iran?” National Interest, March 27, 2020. Paul R. Pillar, “Donald Trump’s Nationalist Response to the Coronavirus,” National Interest, March 26, 2020. Kevin Baron, “Trump Could Have Led the World Against the Coronavirus,” Defense One, March 25, 2020. Editorial Board, “The Coronavirus Pandemic May Mark a Decline in U.S. Leadership,” Washington Post, March 23, 2020. Stephen M. Walt, “The Death of American Competence, Washington’s Reputation for Expertise Has Been One of the Greatest Sources of Its Power. The Coronavirus Pandemic May End It for Good,” Foreign Policy, March 23, 2020. Ronald E. Neumann and Marc Grossman, “More US Diplomats Need to Be Overseas to Best Serve America,” The Hill, March 22, 2020. Steven Erlanger, “Another Virus Victim: The U.S. as a Global Leader in a Time of Crisis,” New York Times, March 20 (updated March 22), 2020. Kori Schake, “The Damage That ‘America First’ Has Done,” Atlantic, March 20, 2020. Daniel B. Baer, “The Virus Has Exposed the Recklessness of Trump’s ‘America First,’” Foreign Policy, March 18, 2020. China’s Potential Role as a Global Leader David M. Weinberg, “Know Comment: Hold China culpable for COVID-19, Don’t Let Beijing Exploit the Coronavirus Chaos to Position Itself at the Center of a New Global Order,” Jerusalem Post, May 8, 2020. Andreas Kluth, “How China Is Losing Europe,” Bloomberg, May 7, 2020. Josh Rogin, “The Pandemic Shows Why Taiwan Is a Far Better Partner than the People’s Republic,” Washington Post, May 7, 2020. Eva Dou, “Fearing Political Dangers, China Spent Years Preparing for This Economic Crash,” Washington Post, May 5, 2020. Diana Fu, “China Has a Playbook for Managing Coronavirus Chaos,” Foreign Policy, May 5, 2020. William A. Stanton, “Wuhan Virus Finally Alters Global Perceptions of the PRC: William Stanton,” Taiwan News, May 5, 2020. Shashank Bengali and Alice Su, “‘Put On a Mask and Shut Up’: China’s New ‘Wolf Warriors’ Spread Hoaxes and Attack a World of Critics,” Los Angeles Times, May 4, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 14 “Exclusive: Internal Chinese Report Warns Beijing Faces Tiananmen-like Global Backlash Over Virus,” Reuters, May 4, 2020. (This article does not list an author.) Steven Erlanger, “Global Backlash Builds Against China Over Coronavirus,” New York Times, May 3, 2020. Lara Marlowe, “Europe’s Relationship with China Is Now One of Mistrust and Hostility,” Irish Times, May 2, 2020. Joel Gehrke, “US Allies Move Toward Trump, Demanding Coronavirus Investigation Despite Chinese Threats,” Washington Examiner, May 1, 2020. Stuart Lau, “Coronavirus: European Union Ratchets Up Pressure on China with Call to Cooperate with inquiry,” South China Morning Post, May 1 (updated May 2), 2020. Minxin Pei, “China's Expensive Bet on Africa Has Failed, Coronavirus Crash in Commodity Prices Has Wasted $200 Billion in Investment and Loans,” Nikkei Asian Review, May 1, 2020. Matt Apuzzo, “Top E.U. Diplomat Says Disinformation Report Was Not Watered Down for China,” New York Times, April 30, 2020. Niall Gray, “COVID-19: A ‘Reckoning’ for UK-China Relations?” Diplomat, April 29, 2020 James Griffiths, “China’s Model of Control Has Been Blamed for the Coronavirus Crisis, But for Some It’s Looking Increasingly Attractive,” CNN, April 29, 2020. Tanvi Madan et al., “China’s Neighbors Face a Belligerent Post-Pandemic Beijing, Experts Discuss the Regional Fallout of the Coronavirus Crisis,” Foreign Policy, April 29, 2020. William Brent, “Generosity Is an Easy Win for China After the Coronavirus Pandemic,” Foreign Policy, April 28, 2020. Damien Cave and Amy Qin, “China Mounts Aggressive Defense to Calls for Coronavirus Compensation,” New York Times, April 28, 2020. Mark Magnier, “China Is Overreaching in Bid for Greater Global Influence Amid Coronavirus Pandemic, US Advisers Say,” South China Morning Post, April 28, 2020. Eleanor Albert, “African Countries Respond to Guangzhou’s ‘Anti-Epidemic Measures,’ Widespread Reports of Racism Against Africans Put China into Damage Control Mode,” Diplomat, April 27, 2020 Shi Jiangtao, “Coronavirus: They’re Only Answering Xi Jinping’s Call but Are China’s ‘Wolf Warrior’ Diplomats Doing More Harm than Good?” South China Morning Post, April 27, 2020. Richard Javad Heydarian, “The Coming China Backlash, There Is a Pent-up Volcano of Rage Against the Chinese Regime for Its Reckless Coverup of a Devouring Pandemic,” National Interest, April 25, 2020. Keith B. Richburg, “After Coronavirus, China’s Relations With the World Will Never Be the Same,” National Interest, April 25, 2020. Jerry Dunleavy, “‘Xi Jinping’s Chernobyl’: Experts Say Chinese Disinformation Aims to Distract World from Coronavirus Failures,” Washington Examiner, April 23, 2020. David Ignatius, “The World Will Demand Answers on COVID-19 Until China Explains What Happened,” Washington Post, April 23, 2020. Veerle Nouwens, “China and the Coronavirus Pandemic: Internal Doubts, External Mistakes,” RUSI, April 23, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 15 Austin Bay, “On Point: The COVID-19 Debacle Previews the Chinese Communist Party’s Imperial World Order,” Strategy Page, April 22, 2020. Frederic Puglie, “China to the Rescue: ‘Mask Diplomacy’ Aims to Win Allies in Latin America,” Washington Times, April 22, 2020. Robert A. Manning, “Why China Will Be the Biggest COVID-19 Loser,” The Hill, April 21, 2020. Daniel R. DePetris, “China’s Great Pandemic Gamble,” National Interest, April 20, 2020. Charles Dunst, “Beijing’s Propaganda Is Finding Few Takers,” Foreign Policy, April 20, 2020. Jamil Anderlini, “Why China is Losing the Coronavirus Narrative,” Financial Times, April 19, 2020. Steven Lee Myers, “China’s Aggressive Diplomacy Weakens Xi Jinping’s Global Standing,” New York Times, April 17 (updated April 20), 2020. Maria Repnikova, “Does China’s Propaganda Work? The Communist Party’s Messaging Is Both More Agile and More Fragile Than It Seems,” New York Times, April 16, 2020. Charles Dunst, “How China’s Mask Diplomacy Backfired,” American Interest, April 15, 2020. Michael Green and Evan S. Medeiros, “The Pandemic Won’t Make China the World’s Leader, Few Countries Are Buying the Model or the Message From Beijing,” Foreign Affairs, April 15, 2020. Gerry Shih, “China’s Bid to Repair Its Coronavirus-hit Image Is Backfiring in the West,” Washington Post, April 14, 2020. Dusan Stojanovic, “China’s ‘Mask Diplomacy’ Wins Support in Eastern Europe,” Associated Press, April 14, 2020. Mohammed Ayoob, “How the Coronavirus Could Undercut China’s Global Standing,” National Interest, April 13, 2020. Chi Wang, “How China Is Losing the World’s Trust Following Its Cover-up of the Coronavirus Crisis,” South China Morning Post, April 13, 2020. Nick Crawford and David Gordon, “China Confronts Major Risk of Debt Crisis on the Belt and Road Due to Pandemic,” Diplomat, April 10, 2020. John Pomfret, “Does the Future Still Belong to the U.S. and China?” Washington Post, April 7, 2020. Plamen Tonchev, “The Belt and Road After COVID-19,” Diplomat, April 7, 2020. Bradley A. Thayer and Lianchao Han, “The Consequences of the Pandemic for China and the World,” National Interest, April 4, 2020. Edward Lucas, “China Was Once the Cradle of the Coronavirus Pandemic But It Has Bounced Back with Astonishing Speed, Writes Edward Lucas As He Reveals the Country May Have Won the War for Global Supremacy As Well,” Daily Mail (UK), April 3, 2020. Philip Wen and Drew Hinshaw, “China Asserts Claim to Global Leadership, Mask by Mask,” Wall Street Journal, April 1, 2020. Zack Beauchamp, “The Myth of Authoritarian Coronavirus Supremacy,” Vox, March 26, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 16 Mark Hannah, “Will America’s Coronavirus Response Inspire Countries to Follow China’s Model?” National Interest, March 24, 2020. Dan Blumenthal, “Donald Trump’s China Problem Has Arrived,” National Interest, March 23, 2020. Azeem Ibrahim, “China’s Debt Diplomacy Will Get a Coronavirus Boost,” Foreign Policy, March 23, 2020. Yang Jiang, “China’s Moment of Vindication,” Danish Institute for International Studies, March 20, 2020. Morten Soendergaard Larsen and Robbie Gramer, “China Casts Itself as Global Savior While U.S. and EU Focus on Virus at Home,” Foreign Policy, March 19, 2020. Bradley A. Thayer and Lianchao Han, “China’s Coronavirus Plan: Create a ‘Silk Road’ of Health Care Leading Towards World Dominance,” National Interest, March 19, 2020. Alan Crawford and Peter Martin, “China Showers Europe With Virus Aid While Sparring With Trump,” Bloomberg, March 19, 2020. U.S. Relations and Great Power Competition with China and Russia Marc Champion, “Trump’s Going All In on a Vaccine. He May Still Get Beaten by China, The Nation That Can Immunize First Stands to Gain Not Just Economic Advantage, But Validation of Its Place in the World,” Bloomberg, May 8, 2020. Editorial Board, “Donald Trump’s Erratic China Policy Undermines Western Unity,” Financial Times, May 7, 2020. Patrick Tucker, “COVID-19 Is Accelerating Trends in the US-China Relationship,” Defense One, May 7, 2020. Joel Gehrke, “US and Western Allies Offer Disjointed Response to China Coronavirus Calamity,” Washington Examiner, May 6, 2020. Frances Martel, “China: If We Have to Pay for Coronavirus, U.S. Has to Pay for AIDS, 2008 Financial Crisis,” Breitbart, May 7, 2020. Kate O’Keeffe, Michael C. Bender, and Chun Han Wong, “Coronavirus Casts Deep Chill Over U.S.-China Relations,” Wall Street Journal, May 6, 2020. RFE/RL, “U.S.: Russia, China Spinning Coronavirus Conspiracies To Blame West,” Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, May 6, 2020. “The U.S. Weaponizes COVID-19 Anger Against China’s Tech Sector,” Stratfor, May 6, 2020. (This article does not list an author.) Doug Bandow, “Making China Pay Would Cost Americans Dearly,” Foreign Policy, May 5, 2020. Bloomberg News, “As Trump Blames China, Beijing Directs Fury at His Top Diplomat,” Bloomberg, May 5, 2020. James Jay Carafano, “How to Keep the Free World From Becoming a Suburb of Beijing,” Heritage Foundation, May 5, 2020. Ali Wyne, “Can China Use the Pandemic to Displace the US?” Defense One, May 5, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 17 Stephen Blank, “The Russo-Chinese Axis Reveals Itself During the Coronavirus Pandemic,” The Hill, May 4, 2020. Ryan Hass, “Clouded Thinking in Washington and Beijing on COVID-19 Crisis,” Brookings Institution, May 4, 2020. Deb Riechmann and Zeke Miller, “Trump’s Anti-China Rhetoric Aimed at Boosting US Leverage,” Associated Press, May 4, 2020. Denny Roy, “8 Chinese Arguments Against Western ‘Hubris’ and Why They Fail,” Diplomat, May 04, 2020. David Wertime, “‘Not the World’s Number One’: Chinese Social Media Piles On the U.S.,” Politico, May 4, 2020. John Lee, “US-China Economic Distancing in the Era of Great Power Rivalry and COVID-19,” United States Studies Centre, May 4, 2020. Humeyra Pamuk and Andrea Shalal, “Trump Administration Pushing to Rip Global Supply Chains from China: Officials,” Reuters, May 4, 2020. David Wertime, “‘Not the World’s Number One’: Chinese Social Media Piles On the U.S.,” Politico, May 4, 2020. Claudia Rosett, “China Is Exploiting the Coronavirus Chaos to Advance Its Agenda, President Xi Wants China at the Center of a New Global Order,” Dallas Morning News, May 3, 2020. Walter Lohman James Jay Carafano, “Here Are Ten Ways To Beat China Over Coronavirus,” National Interest, May 2, 2020. Eric Chan and Peter Loftus, “Chinese Communist Party Information Warfare: US-China Competition during the COVID-19 Pandemic,” Journal of Indo-Pacific Affairs (Air University), May 1, 2020. Ahmed Charai, “How COVID-19 Changes Trump’s China Card,” National Interest, May 1, 2020. Bonnie Kristian, “‘Maximum Pressure’ on China Is No Solution to a Pandemic,” Defense News, May 1, 2020. Dalibor Rohac, “The Kremlin’s Tried-and-True Formula for Tough Times: Look for Enemies Abroad,” Washington Post, May 1, 2020. Alex Ward, “Pressure Mounts on Trump to ‘Drop the Hammer’ on China,” Vox, May 1, 2020. Edward Wong and Ana Swanson, “Some Trump Officials Take Harder Actions on China During Pandemic,” New York Times, May 1, 2020. Joseph Bosco, “The Post-Pandemic New Order in US-China Relations,” The Hill, April 30, 2020. Chuck DeVore, “In a Bid to Weaken America, China Extends a Hand to the States | Opinion,” Newsweek, April 30, 2020. Editorial Board, “China has turned to bullying to avoid accountability. It may be working on Europe,” Washington Post, April 30, 2020. Mathew Ha and Alice Cho, “China’s Coronavirus Disinformation Campaigns Are Integral to Its Global Information Warfare Strategy,” Foundation for Defense of Democracies, April 30, 2020. Jeff Stein, Carol D. Leonnig, Josh Dawsey, and Gerry Shih, “U.S. Officials Crafting Retaliatory Actions Against China Over Coronavirus as President Trump Fumes,” Washington Post, April 30, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 18 Peter B. Walker, “Shift in Mindset Needed So US Can Work with China to Tackle Coronavirus Pandemic and Other Global Issues,” South China Morning Post, April 30, 2020. Joyu Wang and Rachel Yeo, “China Takes Harder Line on Hong Kong Amid Coronavirus Protest Lull,” Wall Street Journal, April 30, 2020. George Barros, Nataliya Bugayova, and Mason Clark, “Russia in Review: Kremlin Misdirection Continues Amid COVID and Peace Processes,” Institute for the Study of War, April 29, 2020. Alan Boyd, “China Drops a Covid-19 Gauntlet on Australia,” Asia Times, April 29, 2020. Lewis Libbby,, “To Confront China After Coronavirus, We Must See the Bigger Picture,” National Review, April 29, 2020. Kinling Lo and Sarah Zheng, “Who Is Winning the China-US Race to Run the World Amid the Covid-19 pandemic?” South China Morning Post, April 29, 2020. Clifford D. May, “How our enemies are handling the pandemic, They’re Staying Focused on Their Missions and Doing Just Fine,” Foundation for Defense of Democracies, April 29, 2020. Fu Ying, “Fu Ying on Why China and America Must Co-operate to Defeat COVID-19,” Economist, April 29, 2020. Damien Cave and Amy Qin, “China Mounts Aggressive Defense to Calls for Coronavirus Compensation,” New York Times, April 28, 2020. Alex Ward, “How China Is Ruthlessly Exploiting the Coronavirus Pandemic It Helped Cause,” Vox, April 28, 2020. Shi Jiangtao, “Coronavirus infects China-US relations as blame game over pandemic intensifies,” South China Morning Post, April 27, 2020. Emily Rauhala, “Trump’s WHO Funding Freeze During Coronavirus Pandemic Gives China an Opening to Expand Its Influence,” Washington Post, April 27, 2020. Patrick Mendis and Dominique Reichenbach, “Will the Trump White House Make China Great Again in a Post-Pandemic Era?” National Interest, April 27, 2020. James Traub, “The Future Is Asian—but Not Chinese, A Post-pandemic Cold War Is Developing between the United States and China—but Both Sides Are Losing the Ideological Fight,” Foreign Policy, April 27, 2020. Eric Farnsworth, “China’s Coronavirus Play in the Americas,” National Interest, April 26, 2020. Yasmeen Serhan and Kathy Gilsinan, “Can the West Actually Ditch China?” Atlantic, April 24, 2020. Javed Ali and A'ndre Ggonawela, “Dueling COVID-19 Blame Narratives Deepen US-China Rift,” The Hill, April 23, 2020. Alexander Gabuev, “The Pandemic Could Tighten China’s Grip on Eurasia,” Foreign Policy, April 23, 2020. Ralph Peters, “China Lies, China Kills, China Wins,” Hoover Institution, April 23, 2020. Josh Rogin, “The Coronavirus Crisis Shows the Risks of Scientific Collaboration with China,” Washington Post, April 23, 2020. Peter Suciu, “Are America and China Headed Towards a South China Sea Showdown? Is Beijing Trying to Push Forward on Its Maritime Claims While the World is Battling Coronavirus?” National Interest, April 23, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 19 John Vandiver, “Coronavirus Pandemic Leads to Spike in Disinformation Directed at US, NATO in Europe,” Stars and Stripes, April 23, 2020. Hal Brands, “Modest Multilateralism Is in America’s Interest—and China’s Too, The Crisis Has Highlighted the Need for More Global Cooperation, but Let’s Not Get Carried Away,” Bloomberg, April 22, 2020. James Green, “China and the United States Are Both Losing the Blame Game,” Foreign Policy, April 22, 2020. Laura Rosenberger, “China’s Coronavirus Information Offensive, Beijing Is Using New Methods to Spin the Pandemic to Its Advantage,” Foreign Affairs, April 22, 2020. Edward Wong, Matthew Rosenberg, and Julian E. Barnes, “Chinese Agents Helped Spread Messages That Sowed Virus Panic in U.S., Officials Say,” New York Times, April 22, 2020. Dean Cheng, “China, COVID-19 and 5G; Golden Opportunity For The West,” Breaking Defense, April 21, 2020. Gregory R. Copley, “China Is Waging A New Kind Of War Against The U.S.,” Oil Price, April 21, 2020. Alan Crawford and Peter Martin, “China’s Coronavirus Diplomacy Has Finally Pushed Europe Too Far,” Bloomberg, April 21, 2020. Jessica Donati, “U.S. Adversaries Are Accelerating, Coordinating Coronavirus Disinformation, Report Says,” Wall Street Journal, April 21, 2020. John Grady, “COVID-19 Pandemic Giving China a Firmer Foothold in Europe,” USNI News, April 21, 2020. Hollie McKay, “China Ups Its Spy Game on US Soil as It Bids to Control Coronavirus Narrative,” Fox News, April 21, 2020. Hannah Roberts, “Moscow’s Coronavirus Offensive,” Politico, April 21, 2020. Betsy Woodruff Swan, “State Report: Russian, Chinese, and Iranian Disinformation Narratives Echoing Each Other,” Politico Pro, April 21, 2020. Yew Lun Tian, Ben Blanchard, “China Rattles Sabres as World Battles Coronavirus Pandemic,” Reuters, April 21, 2020. Riley Walters and Dean Cheng, “How to Hold China Accountable for COVID-19,” Heritage Foundation, April 21, 2020. Tim Ahmann, David Brunnstrom, and Julie Steenhuysen, “Update 1-China May Be Keeping Coronavirus Data for Commercial Gain—Trump Adviser,” Reuters, April 20, 2020. James Jay Carafano, “The Great U.S.-China Divorce Has Arrived,” National Interest, April 20, 2020. Charles Lane, “This Crisis Has Taught Us the True Cost of Doing Business with China,” Washington Post, April 20, 2020. Klaus W. Larres, “China Turns on the Charm and Angers Trump as it Eyes a Global Opportunity in Coronavirus Crisis,” The Conversation, April 20, 2020. John Lee, “Beijing Still Has a Way to Go in Battle for Power,” United States Studies Centre, April 20, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 20 Bradley A. Thayer and Lianchao Han, “Kissinger’s Folly: The Threat to World Order is China,” The Hill, April 19, 2020. Ashley Townshend and Matilda Steward, “Coronavirus Crisis Shows Both China and the US Aren’t Equipped to Lead the World,” United States Studies Centre, April 19, 2020. James Holmes, “How Donald Trump Should Make China Pay for Coronavirus,” National Interest, April 18, 2020. Cleo Paskal, “World Tries to Shake Off Its Dangerous China Addiction,” Sunday Guardian, April 18, 2020. Daniel P. Vajdich, “The Geopolitical Cost of Battling the Coronavirus Separately (China Will Win),” National Interest, April 18, 2020. Robbie Gramer, “NATO Chief Rebukes China Over Coronavirus Disinformation,” Foreign Policy, April 17, 2020. Jeffery A. Green, “Stop China’s Predatory Investments Before the US Becomes Its Next Victim,” Defense News, April 17, 2020. Fred Kaplan, “The China Problem, The Chinese Government Bears Some Responsibility for the Pandemic, But We Still Need Its Help to Fight the Virus,” Slate, April 17, 2020. Abraham Denmark, Charles Edel, and Siddharth Mohandas, “Same as It Ever Was: China’s Pandemic Opportunism on Its Periphery,” War on the Rocks, April 16, 2020. “Is China winning? The geopolitical consequences of covid-19 will be subtle, but unfortunate,” Economist, April 16, 2020. (This article does not list an author.) Elisabeth Braw, “China Is Bargain Hunting—and Western Security Is at Risk, Beijing Could Use the Coronavirus-Induced Economic Crisis to Go on a Buying Spree. The U.S. and European Governments Must Restrict the Purchasing of Distressed Companies in Sensitive Sectors,” Foreign Policy, April 15, 2020. Kristine Lee, “It’s Not Just the WHO: How China Is Moving on the Whole U.N., Despite His Saber-Rattling, Trump’s Pullback Actually Helps Beijing in its New, Inside-Baseball Strategy to Build Influence,” Politico, April 15, 2020. James Palmer, “Why Chinese Embassies Have Embraced Aggressive Diplomacy, Beijing Is Trying to Maintain Its Narrative as Diplomats Spread Misinformation About the Rest of the World’s Coronavirus response,” Foreign Policy, April 15, 2020. Salvatore Babones, “In the Post-Coronavirus World, Chinese Power is Overrated, A Global Resurgence in National Self-Reliance Might Actually Be a Good Thing for America’s Place in the World,” Foreign Policy, April 14, 2020. Martijn Rasser, “Technology Alliances Will Help Shape Our Post-Pandemic future,” C4ISRnet, April 14, 2020. John Lee Cheong Seong, “Beijing Tried to Use the Coronavirus Crisis to Enhance Its Global Standing. It’s not working; Despite American Errors and Poor Leadership, the Pandemic Only Proves That the Foundations of Underlying Strength Are Still Solid for the United States and Fragile for China,” South China Morning Post, April 14, 2020. Brian Whitmore, “Quarantining Sanctions, A Kremlin Diplomatic Gambit Exploits the Pandemic,” Center for European Policy Analysis (CEPA), April 14, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 21 Edward Wong and Paul Mozur, “China’s ‘Donation Diplomacy’ Raises Tensions With U.S.,” New York Times, April 14, 2020. Jack Detsch, “U.S. Official: Beware of Chinese Leaders Bearing Coronavirus Gifts,” Foreign Policy, April 13, 2020. Grant Newsham, “America Takes On The Coronavirus: Is Chinese Help Needed?” And Magazine, April 13, 2020. Isabelle Khurshudyan, “Russia’s State-backed Media Uses the Pandemic to Spin Anti-Western Views. They Are Not Alone,” Washington Post, April 12, 2020. Chen Yun-yu and Emerson Lim, “U.S., China Stepping Up Military Messaging Amid Pandemic: Analysts,” Focus Taiwan, April 12, 2020. Renée DiResta, “For China, the ‘USA Virus’ Is a Geopolitical Ploy,” Atlantic, April 11, 2020. Lee Drake, “What the Trump Administration Needs to Learn from the Plague that Destroyed Athens,” National Interest, April 11, 2020. Bradley A. Thayer Lianchao Han, “China Is Using The Coronavirus Crisis To Gain Political Capital Against America,” National Interest, April 11, 2020. Bradley A. Thayer Lianchao Han, “China’s Coronavirus Weapon: How Beijing Plans to Leverage the Global Supply Chain,” National Interest, April 11, 2020. Philip Citowicki, “COVID-19 Escalates the China-Australia Contest in the Pacific,” Diplomat, April 10, 2020. Catie Edmondson, “China Hawks in Congress See an Opportunity in Coronavirus,” New York Times, April 10 (updated April 14), 2020. Ryan Girdusky, “Bad Ideology, Not Bad Leadership, Caused Our China Problem,” Washington Examiner, April 9, 2020. Alireza Ahmadi, “The Trump Era Has Created a New Challenge for China,” National Interest, April 8, 2020. Keith B. Alexander and Jamil N. Jaffer, “While the World Battles the Coronavirus, Our Adversaries Are Planning Their Next Attack,” The Hill, April 7 2020. James Kraska and Sumantra Maitra, “The Coronavirus Crisis Has Highlighted America’s Failed Foreign Policy Tactics,” National Interest, April 7, 2020. Plamen Tonchev, “The Belt and Road After COVID-19, Possible Post-pandemic Scenarios for China’s Long-term Foreign Policy Strategy,” Diplomat, April 7, 2020. Mark Payumo, “Why China’s Coronavirus Lies Don't Matter If It Plays the Long Information Game, Washington Can Still Beat Beijing’s Information Warfare Campaign, But It Needs to Stop Thinking Short-Term,” National Interest, April 6, 2020. Nadia Schadlow, “Consider the Possibility That Trump Is Right About China, Critics Are Letting Their Disdain for the President Blind Them to Geopolitical Realities,” Atlantic, April 5, 2020. Anthony Vinci and Nadia Schadlow, “Time for the US to Declare Independence from China,” Washington Examiner, April 5, 2020. Madeleine Albright et al., “Saving Lives in America, China, and Around the World,” Asia Society, April 3, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 22 Emma Ashford and Matthew Kroenig,” Will Trump’s Pandemic Response Help or Harm U.S. Power? Russia and China Are Stepping in While the United States and Europe Fumble,” Foreign Policy, April 3, 2020. James Jay Carafano, “America’s Post-Coronavirus China Syndrome,” National Interest, April 1, 2020. Matthew Kroenig, “Why the U.S. Will Outcompete China, The Faith in Autocratic Ascendance and Democratic Decline Is Contrary to Historical Fact,” Atlantic, April 3, 2020. Bruno Maçães, “China Wants to Use the Coronavirus to Take Over the World,” National Review, April 3, 2020. Minxin Pei, “China’s Coming Upheaval, Competition, the Coronavirus, and the Weakness of Xi Jinping,” Foreign Affairs, April 3, 2020. Riley Walters, “Decreasing U.S.-China Trade Is Worrisome,” Heritage Foundation, April 3, 2020. Tom O’Connor and Naveed Jamali, “As U.S. Struggles to Fight Coronavirus, China, Russia See Opportunity to Gain Global Power,” Newsweek, April 1, 2020. Matthew Petti, “Pompeo: China Will Be ‘True Strategic Competitor’ After Coronavirus,” National Interest, April 1, 2020. Ali Wyne, “Why China and the U.S. Can’t Cooperate to Fight Coronavirus,” Washington Post, March 26, 2020. Peter Rough, “How China is Exploiting the Coronavirus to Weaken Democracies,” Foreign Policy, March 25, 2020. James Jay Carafano, “Great Power Competition After the Coronavirus Crisis: What Should America Do?” National Interest, March 24, 2020. Paul Haenle and Lucas Tcheyan, “U.S.-China Cooperation on Coronavirus Hampered by Propaganda War,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, March 24, 2020. Jonathan Marcus, “Coronavirus: US-China Battle Behind the Scenes,” BBC News, March 24, 2020. Mira Rapp-Hooper, “China, America, and the International Order After the Pandemic,” War on the Rocks, March 24, 2020. Doug Bandow, “A War of Words With China Helps Nobody,” Foreign Policy, March 23, 2020. Elisabeth Braw, “As the West Panics, Putin Is Watching,” Foreign Policy, March 23, 2020. Emily de La Bruyere and Nathan Picarsic, “Competition Meets Crisis: China’s Perverse Opportunity and a Strategic Response,” National Interest, March 23, 2020. Matthew Kroenig, “Pandemics Can Fast Forward the Rise and Fall of Great Powers,” National Interest, March 23, 2020. Stephen S. Roach and Daniel J. Arbess, “US Lives and Economic Stability Are Threatened by Coronavirus Conflict with China,” The Hill, March 23, 2020. Gordon G. Chang, “Donald Trump Can't Cooperate with China on Coronavirus,” National Interest, March 22, 2020. Michael Crowley, Edward Wong, and Lara Jakes, “Coronavirus Drives the U.S. and China Deeper Into Global Power Struggle,” New York Times, March 22, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 23 Richard Fontaine, “Virus Competition Is Wrecking China-U.S. Cooperation Hopes, Coronavirus Efforts Are A New Battlefront—and Beijing Is the Only One in the Game,” Foreign Policy, March 20, 2020. James Holmes, “Beware of Pandemic America, Note to China and Russia: Despite Appearances, the Time of Coronavirus May Not Be an Opportune Time for You to Chisel Away at America’s Global Standing,” National Interest, March 20, 2020. Suzanne Nossel, “China Is Fighting the Coronavirus Propaganda War to Win,” Foreign Policy, March 20, 2020. Katie Bo Williams, “US-China Tensions Heat Up As Beijing Seeks Leadership Role,” Defense One, March 20, 2020. David Ignatius, “The Coronavirus Is A Test of Our National Character,” Washington Post, March 19, 2020. David E. Sanger, David D. Kirkpatrick, Sui-Lee Wee, and Katrin Bennhold, “Search for Coronavirus Vaccine Becomes a Global Competition, The United States, China and Europe are battling to be the first to find a cure, bringing a nationalist element to a worldwide crisis ,” New York Times, March 19, 2020. Dan Blumenthal, “Coronavirus and the Future of US-China Geopolitical Competition: What We Know So Far,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, March 18, 2020. Kurt M. Campbell and Rush Doshi, “The Coronavirus Could Reshape Global Order, China Is Maneuvering for International Leadership as the United States Falters,” Foreign Affairs, March 18, 2020. Yasmeen Abutaleb and Josh Dawsey, “Trump’s Soft Touch with China’s Xi Worries Advisers Who Say More Is Needed to Combat Coronavirus Outbreak,” Washington Post, February 16, 2020. Democracy, Authoritarianism, and Autocracy Steven Feldstein, “What Democracy Will Fall Next? Hungary Was the First Democratic Victim of the Coronavirus. It May Not Be the Last,” Foreign Policy, May 7, 2020. Kemal Kirisci, “The Coronavirus Has Led to More Authoritarianism for Turkey,” National Interest, May 6, 2020. Febriana Firdaus. “Indonesians Fear Democracy Is the Next Pandemic Victim,” Foreign Policy, May 4, 2020. Margarita R. Seminario and Claudia Fernandez, “Free Press, Fake News, and Repression during Covid-19: Venezuela, Brazil, and Nicaragua,” Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), May 4, 2020. Jeffrey Smith and Nic Cheeseman, “Authoritarians Are Exploiting the Coronavirus. Democracies Must Not Follow Suit,” Foreign Policy, April 28, 2020. Alexander Cooley and Daniel Nexon, “Why Populists Want a Multipolar World, Aspiring Authoritarians Are Sick of the Liberal Order and Eager for New Patrons in Russia and China,” National Interest, April 25, 2020. Editorial Board, “How China’s Authoritarian System Made the Pandemic Worse,” Washington Post, April 17, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 24 Andrea Kendall-Taylor and Carisa Nietsche, “The Coronavirus Is Exposing Populists’ Hollow Politics, As the Crisis Worsens, Even More Extreme Groups May Prosper,” Foreign Policy, April 16, 2020. Emily Schultheis, “Coronavirus Has Paralyzed Europe’s Far Right,” Foreign Policy, April 14, 2020. Mason Clark and Aidan Therrien, “Russia in Review: Kremlin Tests Authoritarian Societal Control Measures During COVID-19 Crisis,” Institute for the Study of War, April 13, 2020. Suzanne Nossel, “Don’t Let Leaders Use the Coronavirus as an Excuse to Violate Civil Liberties,” Foreign Policy, April 13, 2020. Stephen M. Walt, “The United States Is Getting Infected With Dictatorship,” Foreign Policy, April 13, 2020. Michael Birnbaum and Terrence McCoy, “As Leaders Seize Powers to Fight Coronavirus, Fear Grows for Democracy,” Washington Post, April 12, 2020. Steve H. Hanke, “Crises Enliven ‘Totalitarian Temptations,’” Cato Institute, April 10, 2020. Elisabeth Zerofsky, “How Viktor Orbán Used the Coronavirus to Seize More Power,” New Yorker, April 9, 2020. Tom G. Palmer and Simon Lee, “How One Pandemic Leads to Another,” Cato Institute, April 8, 2020. Frances Z. Brown and Saskia Brechenmacher, and Thomas Carothers, “How Will the Coronavirus Reshape Democracy and Governance Globally?” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, April, 6 2020. James Lamond, “Authoritarian Regimes Seek To Take Advantage of the Coronavirus Pandemic,” Center for American Progress, April 6, 2020. Seth J. Frantzman, “Coronavirus Is Empowering Dictators And Changing The World Order,” National Interest, April 4, 2020. Joshua Kurlantzick, “Dictators Are Using the Coronavirus to Strengthen Their Grip on Power,” Washington Post, April 3, 2020. John Haltiwanger, “The Coronavirus Just Created a New Dictator in Europe and Has Emboldened the Toxic Behavior of Authoritarians Worldwide,” Business Insider, April 1, 2020. Luke McGee, “Power-Hungry Leaders Are Itching to Exploit the Coronavirus Crisis,” CNN, April 1, 2020. Jacob Mchangama and Sarah McLaughlin, “Coronavirus Has Started a Censorship Pandemic,” Foreign Policy, April 1, 2020. Florian Bieber, “Authoritarianism in the Time of the Coronavirus, The Pandemic Offers Dictators—and Democracies Alike—an Opportunity for Abuse,” Foreign Policy, March 30, 2020. Selam Gebrekidan, “For Autocrats, and Others, Coronavirus Is a Chance to Grab Even More Power,” New York Times, March 30, 2020. Anne Applebaum, “The People in Charge See an Opportunity, Around the World, Rulers Are Using the Pandemic As An Excuse to Grab More Power. And the Public Is Going Along with It,” Atlantic, March 23, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 25 Melinda Haring and Doug Klain, “Why Autocrats Love Coronavirus,” National Interest, March 22, 2020. Societal Tension, Reform, and Transformation, and Governmental Stability Robyn Dixon, “Putin Knows How to Rule Russia as An Autocrat. But He Seems on the Sidelines Amid Coronavirus Crisis,” Washington Post, May 7, 2020. Ann M. Simmons, “In Russia, Putin Wrestles With Economic Impact of Coronavirus,” Wall Street Journal, May 6, 2020. Nathan Hodge, “As Coronavirus Hits Record Numbers in Russia, This Is a Dangerous Moment for Putin,” CNN, May 4, 2020. Clara Ferreira Marques, “Coronavirus Has Exposed Putin’s Brittle Regime,” Bloomberg, May 4, 2020. Henry Foy, “Russia: Pandemic Tests Putin’s Grip on Power,” Financial Times, May 4, 2020. Cary Huang, “Coronavirus: China Faces an Economic Reckoning as Covid-19 Turns World Against Globalisation,” South China Morning Post, May 3, 2020. Andrew Higgins, “Putin, Russia’s Man of Action, Is Passive, Even Bored, in the Coronavirus Era,” New York Times, April 30, 2020. Nael M. Shama, “In Egypt, the Coronavirus Poses a Political Threat,” Foreign Policy, April 30, 2020. Don Weinland, “China Slowdown Puts Xi in Political Bind, Coronavirus Threatens Communist Party’s Aim of Widespread Prosperity by End of 2020,” Financial Times, April 28, 2020. Editorial Board, “Russia’s Economic Woes Will Clip Vladimir Putin’s Wings, Pandemic Combined with Collapsing Oil Prices Spells Real Hardship,” Financial Times, April 27, 2020. Lance Kokonos, “Coronavirus Is Making Russia’s Demographic Disaster Even Worse,” National Interest, April 25, 2020. Leon Aron, “The Coronavirus Could Imperil Putin’s Presidency,” Wall Street Journal, April 23, 2020. Holly Ellyatt, “Coronavirus Is a ‘Challenge’ for Putin and ‘Huge Danger’ for the World, Kremlin Warns,” CNBC, April 22, 2020. Rick Gladstone, “Oil Collapse and Covid-19 Create Toxic Geopolitical Stew,” New York Times, April 22, 2020. Sarah Rainsford, “Coronavirus Crisis Tests Putin’s Grip on Power in Russia,” BBC, April 22, 2020. Armand Gosu, “Russia Needs an OPEC+ 2.0 Accord to Avoid a Crisis,” Middle East Institute, April 21, 2020. Patrick Tucker, “Putin Is Projecting Strength In the Face of Coronavirus. But the Image is Cracked,” Defense One, April 21, 2020. Brian Whitmore, “The Desanctification of Putin, The Political Costs of COVID-19 Are Beginning to Mount,” Center for European Policy Analysis (CEPA), April 21, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 26 Steven Erlanger, “Coronavirus Has Lifted Leaders Everywhere. Don’t Expect That to Last,” New York Times, April 15, 2020. James Traub, “After the Coronavirus, the Era of Small Government Will Be Over,” Foreign Policy, April 15, 2020. Frances Z. Brown and Jarrett Blanc, “Coronavirus in Conflict Zones: A Sobering Landscape,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, April 14, 2020. (Includes links to 12 additional writings by various authors focusing on situations in specific countries and regions.) Michael Albertus, “The Coronavirus Will Cause New Crises in Latin America,” Foreign Policy, April 16, 2020. Samuel Brannen, “Will Covid-19 End the Age of Mass Protests?” Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), April 7, 2020. Kyle Harper, “The Coronavirus Is Accelerating History Past the Breaking Point, Every Era Gets the Infectious Diseases—and the Resulting Political Upheaval—It Has Coming,” Foreign Policy, April 6, 2020. Anthony Faiola, Lindzi Wessel, and Shibani Mahtani, “Coronavirus Chills Protests from Chile to Hong Kong to Iraq, Forcing Activists to Innovate,” Washington Post, April 4, 2020. James Jay Carafano, “Coronavirus and Regime Change—Will This Plague Topple Nations Great and Small?” Heritage Foundation, April 1, 2020. Nic Cheeseman, “The Coronavirus Could Topple Governments Around the World,” Foreign Policy, March 31, 2020. Carolyn Whitzman, “Could Coronavirus Lead To a Fairer World?” National Interest, March 31, 2020. Elizabeth Kolbert, “Pandemics and the Shape of Human History, Outbreaks Have Sparked Riots and Propelled Public-Health Innovations, Prefigured Revolutions and Redrawn Maps,” New Yorker, March 20, 2020. Simon Mair, “Why Coronavirus May Change the World (For Better or Worse),” National Interest, March 30, 2020. Nicholas Mulder, “The Coronavirus War Economy Will Change the World,” Foreign Policy, March 26, 2020. World Economy, Globalization, and U.S. Trade Policy Ana Quintana, James Roberts, and Anthony Kim, “A U.S.–Mexico-Canada (USMCA) Economic Partnership Recovery Plan,” Heritage Foundation, May 7, 2020. Desmond Lachman, “Could Italy Default on Its Debt Due to the Coronavirus?” National Interest, May 7, 2020. Ruchir Sharma, “The Pandemic Isn’t Changing Everything, It Is Just Speeding Up Trends That Were Already Underway,” New York Times, May 3, 2020. James Crabtree, “The End of Emerging Markets? Economies such as Brazil, Indonesia, India, Russia, and Turkey face a daunting new reality,” Foreign Policy, May 3, 2020. Kevin Sieff, “The U.S. Wants Mexico to Keep Its Defense and Health-Care Factories Open. Mexican Workers Are Getting Sick and Dying,” Washington Post, May 1, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 27 Ariel E. Levite and Lyu Jinghua, “Travails of an Interconnected World: From Pandemics to the Digital Economy,” Lawfare, April 30, 2020. Nathaniel Taplin, “Trump’s Trade Deal With China Is Another Coronavirus Victim, The Pandemic Is Exposing the Perils of Agreements Based on Numerical Targets Rather Than Tariff Reductions or Policy Concessions,” Wall Street Journal, April 30, 2020. Trevor Jackson, “Terminal Deflation Is Coming, Central Banks’ Interventions in the Pandemic Economy Are Unprecedentedly Vast—and Not Nearly Enough,” Foreign Policy, April 29, 2020. Greg Ip, “Globalization Is Down but Not Out Yet,” Wall Street Journal, April 28, 2020. Zhou Xin, “Coronavirus: How Will China’s Role in the Global Economy Change When Faced with Pandemic Backlash?” South China Morning Post, April 28, 2020. Nicholas Mulder and Adam Tooze, “The Coronavirus Oil Shock Is Just Getting Started,” Foreign Policy, April 23, 2020. Jack Detsch and Robbie Gramer, “The Coronavirus Could Upend Trump’s China Trade Deal,” Foreign Policy, April 21, 2020. Richard Fontaine, “Globalization Will Look Very Different After the Coronavirus Pandemic ,” Foreign Policy, April 17, 2020. Neil Irwin, “It’s the End of the World Economy as We Know It, Experts Suggest There Will Be ‘A Rethink of How Much Any Country Wants to Be Reliant on Any Other Country,’” New York Times, April 16, 2020. Robert Delaney, “Economic Havoc Wreaked by Coronavirus Has Likely Throttled US-China Trade Deal, Experts Say,” South China Morning Post, April 15, 2020. Joseph E. Stiglitz et al., “How the Economy Will Look After the Coronavirus Pandemic, The Pandemic Will Change the Economic and Financial Order Forever. We Asked Nine Leading Global Thinkers for Their Predictions,” Foreign Policy, April 15, 2020. Martin Wolf, “The World Economy Is Now Collapsing, A Microbe Has Overthrown Our Arrogance and Sent Global Output into a Tailspin,” Financial Times, April 14, 2020. Josh Zumbrun, “Coronavirus-Afflicted Global Economy Is Almost Certainly in Recession,” Wall Street Journal, April 14, 2020. By Raphael S. Cohen Sunday, “The Coronavirus Will Not Stop Globalization,” Lawfare, April 12, 2020. Dalia Marin, “How COVID-19 Is Transforming Manufacturing,” Project Syndicate, April 3, 2020. Daniel J. Ikenson, “The Coronavirus Crisis Is the Worst Time For Trump To Put Up Trade Barriers,” National Interest, March 30, 2020. Simon Lester, “The Coronavirus Crisis Is the Right Time For Free Trade,” National Interest, March 30, 2020. David Frum, “The Coronavirus Is Demonstrating the Value of Globalization,” Atlantic, March 27, 2020. Mie Oba, “Coronavirus and the Future of Globalization,” Diplomat, March 18, 2020. Henry Farrell and Abraham Newman, “Will the Coronavirus End Globalization as We Know It?” Foreign Affairs, March 16, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 28 Philippe Legrain Marc, “The Coronavirus Is Killing Globalization as We Know It,” Foreign Policy, March 12, 2020. Allied Defense Spending and U.S. Alliances Ben Doherty, “The Indispensable Nation? Covid-19 Tests the US-Australian Alliance,” Guardian, May 5, 2020. Wallace C. Gregson, “The Coronavirus Creates New National Security Problems for America,” National Defense, May 3, 2020. Marcus Weisgerber, “Global Defense Spending Decline Expected As Nations Deal with Coronavirus,” Defense One, April 28, 2020. Tom Kington, “Back Hard-Hit Businesses? Experts Press EU to Instead Boost Defense Spending,” Defense News, April 27, 2020. Clementine Starling, “Europe Was Just Getting Better at Moving Militaries,” Defense One, April 22, 2020. Brooks Tigner, Brussels, “Covid-19: NATO to Review Military Resilience for Post-pandemic World,” Jane’s, April 17, 2020. Richard Fontaine, “We Need an Atlantic Charter for the Post-coronavirus Era,” Atlantic, April 16, 2020. Deborah Haynes, “Coronavirus: NATO Chief Denies Alliance Has Responded Too Slowly to Pandemic,” Sky News, April 15, 2020. Stéphanie Fillion, “In Canada, Patience Wearing Thin Over Trump’s Antics, A Threat to Militarize the Border and Attempts to Hold Up Lifesaving Medical Supplies Have Roiled the Calmest of Countries,” Foreign Policy, April 14, 2020. Sebastian Sprenger, “NATO Defense Ministers to Weigh Coronavirus Fallout,” Defense News, April 14, 2020. James Jay Carafano, “After Coronavirus—We Still Need Europe and They Need Us. Here’s What Has to Happen,” Heritage Foundation, April 13, 2020. Derek Chollet, Michał Baranowski, and Steven Keil, “Where is NATO? And Where is Trump? The Virus Is Destroying Economies and Paralyzing Societies in Ways Russian Military Planners Could Only Dream,” Defense One, April 13, 2020. Philip H. Gordon and Jeremy Shapiro, “The Atlantic Alliance Had Preexisting Conditions. The Pandemic Will Worsen Them,” War on the Rocks, April 13, 2020. Quentin Lopinot, “Europe Is at War with the Coronavirus. Where Does That Leave European Defense?” Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), April 13, 2020. Janusz Bugajski, “Mind the Gap, And Don’t Succumb to Transatlantic Fever,” Center for European Policy Analysis (CEPA), April 10, 2020. Sophia Becker, Christian Mölling, and Torben Schütz, “The Coronavirus Threatens NATO. Let’s Move to Protect the Alliance,” Defense News, April 9, 2020. Matthew Karnitschnig and Judith Mischke, “Berlin Lets Mask Slip on Feelings for Trump’s America, The Crisis Has Convinced Germans That Trump Puts Other Countries at Risk,” Politico, April 6 (updated April 7), 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 29 Andy Blatchford, “Trump’s Moves to Hold Medical Supplies Tip Trudeau to China,” Politico, April 4 (updated April 5), 2020. Dov S. Zakheim, “NATO’s Budget Virus: How the Pandemic Could Slash Military Spending,” The Hill, March 16, 2020. European Union Michael Birnbaum, “E.U. Defends Handling of China Relations After Beijing Censors Op-ed Written by Bloc’s Ambassadors,” Washington Post, May 7, 2020. Heather A. Conley, “Covid-19 May Encourage a No-Deal Brexit,” Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), May 7, 2020. Lorne Cook and Llazar Semini, “EU Aims to Reassure Balkans with Virus Aid, Economic Support,” Associated Press, May 6, 2020. Christopher Caldwell, “Can the European Union Survive a Pandemic? The Coronavirus Crisis Has Turned Its Member Nations Against Each Other,” New Republic, May 5, 2020. Rick Noack, “The Coronavirus Has Brought Back Border Barriers in Europe, Dividing Couples, Families and Communities,” Washington Post, May 1, 2020. Sinan Ulgen, “The Coronavirus Is Creating a Crisis on Europe’s Borders,” Foreign Policy, May 1, 2020. Spencer Wong, “Is the Coronavirus Ushering in an Era of Eurosceptic Leaders? The Pandemic Could Very Well Be a Watershed Moment in European Politics,” National Interest, April 29, 2020. Elisabeth Braw, “Forget Washington and Beijing. These Days Global Leadership Comes From Berlin,” Foreign Policy, April 28, 2020. Rikard Jozwiak, “EU Monitors See Coordinated COVID-19 Disinformation Effort By Iran, Russia, China,” Radio Farda, April 23, 2020. Jennifer Rankin, “How Covid-19 Poured Cold Water on Netherlands’ EU Romance,” Guardian (UK), April 23, 2020. Peter Rough, “The European Union Needs More National Flexibility,” National Review, April 22, 2020. Donatienne Ruy, “Fault Lines and Prospects for European Solidarity,” Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments (CSIS), April 22, 2020. Bashkim Smakaj, “COVID-19 and the Need for Deep EU Reform,” Euractiv, April 22, 2020. HJ Mai, “The Coronavirus Could Tear the EU Apart,” Vox, April 21, 2020. Stephania Taladrid, “What the Coronavirus Means for Europe’s Future,” New Yorker, April 21, 2020. Sam Fleming, “EU Coronavirus Recovery Fund Plans Face Political Bear Traps,” Financial Times, April 20, 2020. Andrea Dudik and Flavia Krause-Jackson, “Albania’s European Dream Is Just Out of Reach, As the Coronavirus Widens Fractures in the EU, Hopes of a Larger Europe Fade,” Bloomberg Businessweek, April 17, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 30 Dalibor Rohac, “Europe Needs an Alexander Hamilton, Not More Budget Hawks,” Foreign Policy, April 16, 2020. Simon Clark and Ben Dummett, “Coronavirus Accelerates European Efforts to Block Foreign Takeovers,” Wall Street Journal, April 10, 2020. Luke McGee, “The EU Has Bungled Its Response to Coronavirus and It Might Never Fully Recover,” CNN, April 10, 2020. by Tom Rogan, “Coronavirus Bailout Lays Bare European Union Nationalist Divisions,” Washington Examiner, April 10, 2020. Samuel Volkin, “Covid-19 and a Splintered European Union,” Hub (Johns Hopkins University), April 10, 2020. Oliver Wiseman, “Will We Meet Again? The Covid-19 Crisis Is Testing European Unity to the Breaking Point,” City Journal, April 8, 2020. Heather A. Conley, “An Eroding European Union,” Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), April 6, 2020. Katya Adler, “Coronavirus Outbreak Eats Into EU Unity,” BBC, April 3, 2020. Katharina Konarek, “COVID-19—A Make-It or Break-It Moment for the European Union,” The Hill, April 3, 2020. Kevin Allison, “A COVID-19 test for the European Union,” Gzero Media, March 31, 2020. Definition of, and Budgeting for, U.S. National Security Joseph Marks, “The Cybersecurity 202: Security Pros Form Alliance to Help Hospitals Facing Hacking Threats During Pandemic,” Washington Post, May 4, 2020. Greg Barbaccia, “The Coronavirus Pandemic Will Force a Paradigm Shift in the U.S. Intelligence Community,” National Interest, April 23, 2020. Kori Schake, “A New Org Chart Won’t Stop the Next Pandemic,” Bloomberg, April 22, 2020. Rachel Olney, “How Will the Pandemic Affect National Security Innovation?” War on the Rocks, April 21, 2020. Christopher Woody, “After Coronavirus, the US Needs to Worry about a ‘7th domain’ of Warfare, Top Navy Commander in Europe Says,” Business Insider, April 17, 2020. David E. Sanger, “Analysis: Will Pandemic Make Trump Rethink National Security?” New York Times, April 15, 2020. Benjamin Jensen, “When Systems Fail: What Pandemics and Cyberspace Tell Us About the Future of National Security,” War on the Rocks, April 9, 2020. Christopher Preble, “How will COVID-19 Change US National Security Strategy?” Responsible Statecraft, April 8, 2020. Glenn S. Gerstell and Michael Morell, “Four Ways U.S. Intelligence Efforts Should Change in the Wake of the Coronavirus Pandemic,” Washington Post, April 7, 2020. Oona A. Hathaway, “After COVID-19, We Need to Redefine ‘National Security,’ The Post-9/11 Era Is Over,” Slate, April 7, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 31 Zachery Tyson Brown, “America’s National Security Software Needs an Upgrade, The Outdated U.S. Security Apparatus Was Completely Unprepared for the Coronavirus Pandemic ,” Foreign Policy, April 6, 2020. Ben Rhodes, “The 9/11 Era Is Over, The Coronavirus Pandemic and a Chapter of History That Should Have Expired Long Ago,” Atlantic, April 6, 2020. Gregory D. Koblentz and Michael Hunzeker, “National Security in the Age of Pandemics,” Defense One, April 3, 2020. Nahal Toosi, “Coronavirus Rattles America’s National Security Priesthood,” Politico Pro, March 29, 2020. Joseph S. Nye, Jr., “COVID-19’s Painful Lesson about Strategy and Power,” War on the Rocks, March 26, 2020. Gary J. Schmitt, “National Security and the Pandemic of 2020,” American Interest, March 20, 2020. U.S. Defense Strategy, Defense Budget, and Military Operations Susan Montoya Bryan (Associated Press), “US Must Move Ahead with Work on Nukes, Says Nuclear Security Boss,” Defense News, May 6, 2020. Leo Shane III, “No Extra Money for Defense Amid Coronavirus Crisis, Think Tank Argues,” Military Times, May 6, 2020. Hal Brands, “Can a Broke America Fight a Cold War With China? The Coronavirus Has United Americans Against Beijing’s Aggressions, But It Will Also Devastate the Pentagon Budget,” Bloomberg, May 5, 2020. Rebeccah L. Heinrichs, “Expand Missile Defenses During the Pandemic, Don’t Cut Them,” Defense News, May 5, 2020. Fred Kaplan, “Now Is the Time to Cut the Defense Budget,” Slate, May 5, 2020. Paul McLeary, “Old Weapons Under Fire As COVID Debt Rises,” Breaking Defense, May 5, 2020. Aaron Mehta, “Esper: Flat Budget Could Speed Cutting of Legacy Programs,” Defense News, May 5, 2020. John M. Donnelly, “US military poised for post-pandemic shift,” CQ (Congressional Quarterly), May 4, 2020. Ben Werner, “SECDEF Esper Preparing For Future Defense Spending Cuts,” USNI News, May 4, 2020. Rebecca Kheel, “Defense Budget Brawl Looms After Pandemic,” The Hill, May 3, 2020. Anrea Howard, “The Pandemic and America’s Response to Future Bioweapons,” War on the Rocks, May 1, 2020. Paul McLeary, “Pentagon Wary Of Adversaries Buying Defense Firms Amid Economic Crisis ,” Breaking Defense, April 30, 2020. Ben Wolfgang, “U.S. Military Ramps Up Counterterrorism Operations in Africa Amid Pandemic,” Washington Times, April 29, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 32 David Barno and Nora Bensahel, “Five Ways the U.S. Military Will Change After the Pandemic,” War on the Rocks, April 28, 2020. Theresa Hitchens, “DoD Budget Cuts Likely As $4 Trillion Deficit Looms,” Breaking Defense, April 27, 2020. Walter Russell Mead, “The Century of Bioweapons,” Wall Street Journal, April 27, 2020. Connor O’Brien, “Defense Boosters Fire Warning Shots over Budget Cuts Due to Pandemic,” Politico Pro, April 24, 2020. Natasha Bertrand, Daniel Lippman, and Lara Seligman, “Officials Probe the Threat of a Coronavirus Bioweapon,” Politico Pro, April 23, 2020. William D. Hartung, “Now Isn’t the Time to Push for Nuclear Modernization,” Defense News, April 21, 2020. Loren Thompson, “How Coronavirus Could Permanently Transform The U.S. Military,” Forbes, April 20, 2020. Todd Harrison, “DoD Must Identify Its ‘Crown Jewels’ in Preparation for Fiscal Uncertainty,” Defense News, April 15, 2020. Michael J. Mazarr, “Toward a New Theory of Power Projection,” War on the Rocks, April 15, 2020. Robert Burns, “Military Sees No Quick Exit From ‘New World’ of Coronavirus,” Associated Press, April 14, 2020. Tony Bertuca, “Global Pandemic Threatens to Hobble National Defense Strategy,” Inside Defense, April 13, 2020. David Ignatius, “The Coronavirus Is Already Reshaping Defense Strategies,” Washington Post, April 9, 2020. Daniel L. Davis, “Coronavirus Means No More Money for Forever Wars,” National Interest, April 7, 2020. Harrison Schramm, Kevin A. Chlan, Peter Kouretsos, COVID-19, Analysis and Policy Implications, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2020 (released April 7, 2020), 31 pp. Jason Sherman, “Analyst: Pandemic Will Squeeze Defense Spending As Nation’s Focus Shifts to Health Care,” Inside Defense, April 6, 2020. Stratfor Worldview, “Will the Coronavirus Ruin Countries’ Ability to Wage War?” National Interest, April 5, 2020. James G. Foggo III, “Germs: The Seventh Domain of Warfare,” U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, April 2020. David Barno and Nora Bensahel, “After the Pandemic: America and National Security in a Changed World,” War on the Rocks, March 31, 2020. Max Boot, “Covid-19 is Killing Off Our Traditional Notions of National Defense,” Washington Post, March 31, 2020. Jim Thomas, “A Blueprint for Rebuilding America’s Military After the Coronavirus,” National Interest, March 28, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 33 Doug Bandow, “Now’s The Time To Become A Truly ‘America First’ Military, With Coronavirus Killing the Economy, We Can No Longer Afford to Project Power Everywhere,” American Conservative, March 26, 2020. Doug Bandow, “How the Coronavirus Shows North Korea Doesn’t Matter That Much to America,” National Interest, March 25, 2020. Doug Bandow, “Coronavirus Means America Is Really Broke. Trump Should Get the Hell Out of Syria,” National Interest, March 22, 2020. U.S. Foreign Assistance and International Debt Relief Michael H. Fuchs, Alexandra Schmitt, and Haneul Lee, “Foreign Aid is Critical to Stopping the Coronavirus,” National Interest, May 3, 2020. Daniel F. Runde, Conor M. Savoy, and Shannon McKeown, “Covid-19 Has Consequences for U.S. Foreign Aid and Global Leadership,” Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), May 1, 2020. James Kynge and Sun Yu, “China Faces Wave of Calls for Debt Relief on ‘Belt and Road’ Projects,” Financial Times, April 30, 2020. Charles Holmes, Anthony Lake, and Witney Schneidman, “It’s Time to Help Africa Fight the Virus, The Continent Is Ripe for a Public Health Disaster, and Western Powers Must Step in to Prevent Another Global Catastrophe,” Foreign Policy, April 29, 2020. Matthew Lee, “Virus Pandemic Collides with Trump’s Disdain for Foreign Aid,” Associated Press, April 17, 2020. Adam Tooze, “A Global Pandemic Bailout Was Coming—Until America Stopped It,” Foreign Policy, April 17, 2020. Editorial Board, “Even as Rich Countries Reel, It’s Imperative to Help Emerging Markets,” Washington Post, April 16, 2020. Dayo Israel, “Unless Canceled, Africa’s Debt Burden Will Cause COVID-19 to Kill Millions,” Washington Examiner, April 16, 2020. Cara Anna and Aya Batrawy, “Richest Countries Agree to Freeze Poorer Nations’ Debt,” Associated Press, April 15, 2020. Nahal Toosi, “Trump Hobbles Foreign Aid as Coronavirus Rips Around the World, Confusion at the Top Has Crippled USAID at a Critical Time for the Global Battle Against the Pandemic,” Politico, April 15, 2020. Josh Zumbrun, “G-7 Countries Support Debt Relief for Poorest Countries If Joined by Full G-20,” Wall Street Journal, April 14, 2020. Robbie Gramer, “Outgoing USAID Chief Says Pandemic Underscores Importance of Foreign Aid,” Foreign Policy, April 13, 2020. Josh Rogin, “The Pandemic Means the Trump Administration Must Stop Mistreating USAID,” Washington Post, April 9, 2020. Josh Rogin, “America’s $2 Trillion Coronavirus Stimulus Package Ignores the Rest of the World,” Washington Post, March 26, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 34 Non-state Actors Ryan Browne, “ISIS Seeks to Exploit Pandemic to Mount Resurgence in Iraq and Syria,” CNN, May 8, 2020. Robert Muggah, “The Pandemic Has Triggered Dramatic Shifts in the Global Criminal Underworld,” Foreign Policy, May 8, 2020. Ashley Jackson, “For the Taliban, the Pandemic Is a Ladder,” Foreign Policy, May 6, 2020. Brandon Prins, “Why Coronavirus May Lead to More Piracy,” National Interest, May 6, 2020. Lydia Khalil, “COVID-19 and America’s Counter-Terrorism Response,” War on the Rocks, May 1, 2020. Luke Baker, “Militants, Fringe Groups Exploiting COVID-19, Warns EU Anti-Terrorism Chief,” Reuters, April 30, 2020. Joseph Hincks, “With the World Busy Fighting COVID-19, Could ISIS Mount a Resurgence?” Time, April 29, 2020. Luis Fajardo, “Coronavirus: Latin American Crime Gangs Adapt to Pandemic,” BBC, April 22, 2020. Raffaello Pantucci, “After the Coronavirus, Terrorism Won’t Be the Same,” Foreign Policy, April 22, 2020. Valentina Di Donato and Tim Lister, “The Mafia Is Poised to Exploit Coronavirus, and Not Just in Italy,” CNN, April 19, 2020. Jim Mustian and Jake Bleiberg, “‘Cartels Are Scrambling’: Virus Snarls Global Drug Trade,” Associated Press, April 19, 2020. Colum Lynch, “How Trump and Putin Weakened U.N. Bid for a Global Cease-Fire, U.S. Officials Worry That Counterterrorism Operations Will Be Constrained,” Foreign Policy, April 17, 2020. Seth J. Frantzman, “Iran Regime, ISIS and Other Extremists Exploit Coronavirus to Wreak Havoc,” Jerusalem Post, April 16, 2020. Kevin Sieff, Susannah George, and Kareem Fahim, “Now Joining the Fight Against Coronavirus: The World’s Armed Rebels, Drug Cartels and Gangs,” Washington Post, April 14, 2020. Souad Mekhennet, “Far-Right and Radical Islamist Groups Are Exploiting Coronavirus Turmoil,” Washington Post, April 10, 2020. Yonah Jeremy Bob, “Coronavirus Economic Impact Could Block Iran from Funding Terror—INSS,” Jerusalem Post, April 7, 2020. Vanda Felbab-Brown, “What Coronavirus Means for Online Fraud, Forced Sex, Drug Smuggling and Wildlife Trafficking,” Lawfare, April 3, 2020. Cara Anna, “Extremists See Global Chaos from Virus As An Opportunity,” Associated Press, April 2, 2020. Stratfor Worldview, “Coronavirus Could Lead To Lots of This in the Near Future,” National Interest, March 22, 2020. (The article discusses potential actions by non-state actors.) COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service 35 U.S. Attention to International Issues Other than COVID-19 Arjun Kapur, “Scotland Launched an Invasion During the Black Death. Does History Tell China to Attack Taiwan?” National Interest, May 2, 2020. Con Coughlin, “China Exploiting the Coronavirus Pandemic to Expand in Asia,” Gatestone Institute, April 30, 2020. Corinne Redfern, “The Pandemic’s Hidden Human Trafficking Crisis, The Coronavirus Has Created More People Vulnerable to Exploitation by Traffickers—and Revealed the World’s Unpreparedness to Protect Them,” Foreign Policy, April 30, 2020. Paul Haenle, “Security Concerns in Asia-Pacific Escalate Amid Coronavirus Scramble, While the Trump Administration Is Consumed with the Coronavirus, China and North Korea Are Seizing the Moment for Strategic Advantage,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, April 29, 2020. Bertil Lintner, “Time May Be Ripe for China to Invade Taiwan, Pandemic Has Left a US Security Vacuum Around the Self-Governing Island China Has Oft-Vowed to ‘Reincorporate’ with the Mainland,” Asia Times, April 28, 2020. Victor Davis Hanson, “Pandemic Only 1 of America’s Security Concerns,” Daily Signal, April 23, 2020. Gordon Lubold and Dion Nissenbaum, “With Trump Facing Virus Crisis, U.S. Warns Rivals Not to Seek Advantage,” Wall Street Journal, April 20, 2020. Ellen Mitchell, “Foreign Powers Test US Defenses Amid Coronavirus Pandemic,” The Hill, April 19, 2020. Karen DeYoung, “Foreign Policy Challenges Persist for a Distracted U.S. in the Midst of Pandemic,” Washington Post, April 10, 2020. Sylvie Lanteaume (Agence France-Presse), “Hit by Virus, Pentagon Warns Enemies: Don’t Test Us,” Yahoo News, April 10, 2020. “With the world distracted, China intimidates Taiwan,” Economist, April 8, 2020. (This article does not list an author.) Fred Kaplan, “The Coronavirus Hasn’t Stopped Trump From Undermining Our National Security,” Slate, March 26, 2020. Role of Congress Robbie Gramer and Jack Detsch, “Pandemic Stymies Congressional Check on Trump’s Foreign Policy,” Foreign Policy, April 8, 2020. COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment Congressional Research Service R46336 · VERSION 3 · UPDATED 36 Author Information Ronald O'Rourke Specialist in Naval Affairs Michael Moodie Assistant Director and Senior Specialist in Foreign Affairs, Defense and Trade Kathleen J. McInnis Specialist in International Security Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 		2020-05-08T17:04:06-0400
Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Updated May 7, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov RS20643 Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Summary The aircraft carriers CVN-78, CVN-79, CVN-80, and CVN-81 are the first four ships in the Navy’s new Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78) class of nuclear-powered aircraft carriers (CVNs). The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $2,714.1 million (i.e., about $2.7 billion) in procurement funding for CVN-78 class ships, including $71.0 million for CVN-78, $997.5 million for CVN-80, and $1,645.6 million for CVN-81. CVN-78 (Gerald R. Ford) was procured in FY2008. The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget estimates the ship’s procurement cost at $13,316.5 million (i.e., about $13.3 billion) in then-year dollars. The ship was commissioned into service on July 22, 2017. The Navy is currently working to complete construction, testing, and certification of the ship’s 11 weapons elevators and to correct other technical problems aboard the ship. CVN-79 (John F. Kennedy) was procured in FY2013. The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget estimates the ship’s procurement cost at $11,397.7 million (i.e., about $11.4 billion) in then-year dollars. The ship is being built with an improved process that incorporates lessons learned from the construction of CVN-78. CVN-79 is scheduled for delivery to the Navy in September 2024. CVN-80 (Enterprise) was procured in FY2018. The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget estimates the ship’s procurement cost at $12,321.3 million (i.e., about $12.3 billion) in then-year dollars. The ship is scheduled for delivery to the Navy in March 2028. CVN-81 (Doris Miller) is treated in this report as a ship that was procured in FY2019, consistent with congressional action on the Navy’s FY2019 budget. The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission shows CVN-81 as a ship that was procured in FY2020. The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates the ship’s procurement cost at $12,450.7 million (i.e., about $12.5 billion) in then-year dollars. The ship is scheduled for delivery to the Navy in February 2032. CVN-80 and CVN-81 are being procured under a two-ship block buy contract that was authorized by Section 121(a)(2) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (H.R. 5515/P.L. 115-232 of August 13, 2018). The use of the two-ship block buy contract reduced the combined estimated procurement cost of the two ships. Oversight issues for Congress for the CVN-78 program include the following:  the potential impact of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation on the execution of U.S. military shipbuilding programs, including the CVN-78 program;  a delay in CVN-78’s first deployment due to the need to complete work on the ship’s weapons elevators and correct other technical problems aboard the ship;  whether the Navy in its FY2020 budget request has accurately priced the work on the CVN-78 program that it is proposing to fund in FY2021;  cost growth in the CVN-78 program, Navy efforts to stem that growth, and Navy efforts to manage costs so as to stay within the program’s cost caps;  additional CVN-78 program issues that were raised in a December 2019 report from the Department of Defense’s (DOD’s) Director of Operational Test and Evaluation (DOT&E) and a May 2019 Government Accountability Office (GAO) report on DOD weapon systems;  whether the aircraft carrier to be procured after CVN-81 should be a Ford-class carrier (i.e., a large-deck, nuclear-powered carrier) or a smaller and perhaps nonnuclear-powered aircraft carrier.Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Background ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Current Navy Aircraft Carrier Force ......................................................................................... 1 Statutory Requirements for Numbers of Carriers and Carrier Air Wings ................................. 1 Requirement to Maintain Not Less Than 11 Carriers ......................................................... 1 Requirement to Maintain a Minimum of Nine Carrier Air Wings ...................................... 2 Navy Force-Level Goal of 12 Carriers ...................................................................................... 2 12-Carrier Goal Established December 2016 ..................................................................... 2 Planned and Potential Dates for Achieving 12-Carrier Force ............................................. 2 April 2020 Press Report of DOD Assessment on Revised Navy Force-Level Goal ................. 3 Incremental Funding Authority for Aircraft Carriers ................................................................ 3 Aircraft Carrier Construction Industrial Base ........................................................................... 4 Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78) Class Program ................................................................................ 4 Overview ............................................................................................................................. 4 CVN-78 (Gerald R. Ford) ................................................................................................... 4 CVN-79 (John F. Kennedy) ................................................................................................ 4 CVN-80 (Enterprise) ........................................................................................................... 5 CVN-81 (Doris Miller) ....................................................................................................... 6 Two-Ship Block Buy Contract for CVN-80 and CVN-81 .................................................. 6 Program Procurement Cost Cap .......................................................................................... 6 Program Procurement Funding ........................................................................................... 7 Changes in Estimated Unit Procurement Costs Since FY2008 Budget .............................. 8 Issues for Congress for FY2021 .................................................................................................... 10 Potential Impact of COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Situation ........................................................ 10 Delay in CVN-78’s Deployment Due to Weapon Elevators and Other Problems .................. 10 Overview ........................................................................................................................... 10 Potential Oversight Questions ........................................................................................... 12 Recent Press Reports......................................................................................................... 12 Pricing of Proposed FY2021 Work on CVN-78 Program ....................................................... 21 Cost Growth and Managing Costs within Program Cost Caps ............................................... 22 Overview ........................................................................................................................... 22 CVN-78 ............................................................................................................................. 23 CVNs 79, 80, and 81 ......................................................................................................... 25 Issues Raised in December 2019 DOT&E and May 2019 GAO Reports ............................... 28 December 2019 DOT&E Report ...................................................................................... 28 Issues Raised in May 2019 GAO Report .......................................................................... 30 Design of Aircraft Carrier to Be Procured after CVN-81 ....................................................... 32 Overview ........................................................................................................................... 32 Current Discussion ............................................................................................................ 33 Future Carrier 2030 Task Force Announced on March 9 .................................................. 34 Shock Trial .............................................................................................................................. 35 Legislative Activity for FY2021 .................................................................................................... 35 Summary of Congressional Action on FY2021 Funding Request .......................................... 35 Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Figures Figure 1. USS Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78) ....................................................................................... 5 Tables Table 1. Procurement Funding for CVNs 78, 79, 80, and 81 Through FY2028 ............................. 8 Table 2. Changes in Estimated Procurement Costs of CVNs 78, 79, 80, and 81 ............................ 9 Table 3. Congressional Action on FY2021 Procurement Funding Request .................................. 35 Appendixes Appendix A. Background Information on Two-Ship Block Buy for CVN-80 and CVN-81 ........ 36 Appendix B. Shock Trial ............................................................................................................... 40 Contacts Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 41 Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction This report provides background information and potential oversight issues for Congress on the Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78) class nuclear-powered aircraft carrier (CVN) aircraft carrier program. The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $2,714.2 million (i.e., about $2.7 billion) in procurement funding for the program. Congress’s decisions on the CVN-78 program could substantially affect Navy capabilities and funding requirements and the shipbuilding industrial base. For an overview of the strategic and budgetary context in which the CVN-78 class program and other Navy shipbuilding programs may be considered, see CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.1 Background Current Navy Aircraft Carrier Force The Navy’s current aircraft carrier force consists of 11 CVNs,2 including 10 Nimitz-class ships (CVNs 68 through 77) that entered service between 1975 and 2009, and one Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78) class ship that was commissioned into service on July 22, 2017.3 Statutory Requirements for Numbers of Carriers and Carrier Air Wings Requirement to Maintain Not Less Than 11 Carriers 10 U.S.C. 8062(b) requires the Navy to maintain a force of not less than 11 operational aircraft carriers.4 The requirement for the Navy to maintain not less than a certain number of operational aircraft carriers was established by Section 126 of the FY2006 National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 1815/P.L. 109-163 of January 6, 2006), which set the number at 12 carriers. The requirement was changed from 12 carriers to 11 carriers by Section 1011(a) of the FY2007 John Warner National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 5122/P.L. 109-364 of October 17, 2006).5 1 See also CRS Report R43838, Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke, and CRS Report R44891, U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke and Michael Moodie. 2 The Navy’s last remaining conventionally powered carrier (CV), Kitty Hawk (CV-63), was decommissioned on January 31, 2009. 3 The commissioning into service of CVN-78 on July 22, 2017, ended a period during which the carrier force had declined to 10 ships—a period that began on December 1, 2012, with the inactivation of the one-of-a-kind nuclear-powered aircraft carrier Enterprise (CVN-65), a ship that entered service in 1961. 4 10 U.S.C. 8062 was previously numbered as 10 U.S.C. 5062. It was renumbered as 10 U.S.C. 8062 by Section 807 of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (H.R. 5515/P.L. 115-232 of August 13, 2018), which directed a renumbering of sections and titles of Title 10 relating to the Navy and Marine Corps. (Sections 806 and 808 of P.L. 115-232 directed a similar renumbering of sections and titles relating to the Air Force and Army, respectively.) 5 As mentioned in footnote 3, the carrier force dropped from 11 ships to 10 ships between December 1, 2017, when Enterprise (CVN-65) was inactivated, and July 22, 2017, when CVN-78 was commissioned into service. Anticipating the gap between the inactivation of CVN-65 and the commissioning of CVN-78, the Navy asked Congress for a Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 2 Requirement to Maintain a Minimum of Nine Carrier Air Wings 10 U.S.C. 8062(e), which was added by Section 1042 of the FY2017 National Defense Authorization Act (S. 2943/P.L. 114-328 of December 23, 2016), requires the Navy to maintain a minimum of nine carrier air wings.6 Navy Force-Level Goal of 12 Carriers 12-Carrier Goal Established December 2016 In December 2016, the Navy released a force-level goal for achieving and maintaining a fleet of 355 ships, including 12 aircraft carriers7—one more than the minimum of 11 carriers required by 10 U.S.C. 8062(b). Planned and Potential Dates for Achieving 12-Carrier Force Given the time needed to build a carrier and the projected retirement dates of existing carriers, increasing the carrier force from 11 ships to 12 ships on a sustained basis would take a number of years.8 Under the Navy’s FY2020 30-year shipbuilding plan, carrier procurement would shift from 5-year centers (i.e., one carrier procured each five years) to 4-year centers after the procurement of CVN-82 in FY2028, and a 12-carrier force would be achieved on a sustained basis in the 2060s.9 temporary waiver of 10 U.S.C. 8062(b) to accommodate the period between the two events. Section 1023 of the FY2010 National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 2647/P.L. 111-84 of October 28, 2009) authorized the waiver, permitting the Navy to have 10 operational carriers between the inactivation of CVN-65 and the commissioning of CVN-78. 6 10 U.S.C. 8062(e) states the following: The Secretary of the Navy shall ensure that- (1) the Navy maintains a minimum of 9 carrier air wings until the earlier of- (A) the date on which additional operationally deployable aircraft carriers can fully support a 10th carrier air wing; or (B) October 1, 2025; (2) after the earlier of the two dates referred to in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1), the Navy maintains a minimum of 10 carrier air wings; and (3) for each such carrier air wing, the Navy maintains a dedicated and fully staffed headquarters. 7 For more on the 355-ship force-level goal, see CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 8 Procuring carriers on 3-year centers would achieve a 12-carrier force on a sustained basis by about 2030, unless the service lives of one or more existing carriers were substantially extended. Procuring carriers on 3.5-year centers (i.e., a combination of 3- and 4-year centers) would achieve a 12-carrier force on a sustained basis no earlier than about 2034, unless the service lives of one or more existing carriers were substantially extended. Procuring carriers on 4-year centers would achieve a 12-carrier force on a sustained basis by about 2063—almost 30 years later than under 3.5-year centers—unless the service lives of one or more existing carriers were substantially extended. (Source for 2063 date in relation to four-year centers: Congressional Budget Office (CBO), in a telephone consultation with CRS on May 18, 2017.) 9 The projected size of the carrier force in the Navy’s FY2020 30-year (FY2020-FY2049) shipbuilding plan reflected the Navy’s now-withdrawn FY2020 budget proposal to not fund the RCOH for the aircraft carrier CVN-75 (Harry S. Truman), and to instead retire the ship around FY2024. With the withdrawal of this budget proposal, the projected size of the carrier force became, for the period FY2022-FY2047, one ship higher than what is shown in the Navy’s FY2020 budget submission. The newly adjusted force-level projection, reflecting the withdrawal of the proposal to retire CVN-75 around FY2024, were as follows: The force is projected to include 11 ships in FY2020-FY2021, 12 ships in Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 3 April 2020 Press Report of DOD Assessment on Revised Navy Force-Level Goal An April 20, 2020, press report stated: An internal Office of the Secretary of Defense assessment calls for the Navy to cut two aircraft carriers from its fleet, freeze the large surface combatant fleet of destroyers and cruisers around current levels and add dozens of unmanned or lightly manned ships to the inventory, according to documents obtained by Defense News. The study calls for a fleet of nine carriers, down from the current fleet of 11, and for 65 unmanned or lightly manned surface vessels. The study calls for a surface force of between 80 and 90 large surface combatants, and an increase in the number of small surface combatants—between 55 and 70, which is substantially more than the Navy currently operates. The assessment is part of an ongoing DoD-wide review of Navy force structure and seem to echo what Defense Secretary Mark Esper has been saying for months: the Defense Department wants to begin de-emphasizing aircraft carriers as the centerpiece of the Navy's force projection and put more emphasis on unmanned technologies that can be more easily sacrificed in a conflict and can achieve their missions more affordably…. There are about 90 cruisers and destroyers in the fleet: the study recommended retaining at least 80 but keeping about as many as the Navy currently operates at the high end. The Navy’s small surface combatant program is essentially the 20 littoral combat ships in commission today, with another 15 under contract, as well as the 20 next-generation frigates, which would get to the minimum number in the assessment of 55 small combatants, with the additional 15 presumably being more frigates.10 Incremental Funding Authority for Aircraft Carriers In recent years, Congress has authorized DOD to use incremental funding for procuring certain Navy ships, most notably aircraft carriers.11 Under incremental funding, some of the funding FY2022-FY2024, 11 ships in FY2025-FY2026, 10 ships in FY2027, 11 ships in FY2028-FY2039, 10 ships in FY2040, 11 ships in FY2041, 10 ships in FY2042-FY2044, 11 ships in FY2045, 10 ships in FY2046-FY2047, 9 ships in FY2048, and 10 ships in FY2049. 10 David B. Larter, “Defense Department Study Calls for Cutting 2 of the US Navy’s Aircraft Carriers,” Defense News, April 20, 2020. 11 The provisions providing authority for using incremental funding for procuring CVN-78 class carriers are as follows: Section 121 of the FY2007 John Warner National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 5122/P.L. 109-364 of October 17, 2006) granted the Navy the authority to use four-year incremental funding for CVNs 78, 79, and 80. Under this authority, the Navy could fully fund each of these ships over a four-year period that includes the ship’s year of procurement and three subsequent years. Section 124 of the FY2012 National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 1540/P.L. 112-81 of December 31, 2011) amended Section 121 of P.L. 109-364 to grant the Navy the authority to use five-year incremental funding for CVNs 78, 79, and 80. Since CVN-78 was fully funded in FY2008-FY2011, the provision in practice originally applied to CVNs 79 and 80, although as discussed in the footnote to Table 1, the Navy made use of the authority in connection with an FY2020 reprogramming action that reprogrammed $86.0 million of funding into FY2012 for CVN-78. Section 121 of the FY2013 National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 4310/P.L. 112-239 of January 2, 2013) amended Section 121 of P.L. 109-364 to grant the Navy the authority to use six-year incremental funding for CVNs 78, 79, and 80. Since CVN-78 was fully funded in FY2008-FY2011, the provision in practice applies to CVNs 79 and 80. Section 121(c) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (H.R. 5515/P.L. 115-232 of August 13, 2018) authorized incremental funding to be used for making payments under the two-ship block buy Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 4 needed to fully fund a ship is provided in one or more years after the year in which the ship is procured.12 Aircraft Carrier Construction Industrial Base All U.S. aircraft carriers procured since FY1958 have been built by Huntington Ingalls Industries/Newport News Shipbuilding (HII/NNS), of Newport News, VA. HII/NNS is the only U.S. shipyard that can build large-deck, nuclear-powered aircraft carriers. The aircraft carrier construction industrial base also includes roughly 2,000 supplier firms in 46 states.13 Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78) Class Program Overview The Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78) class carrier design (Figure 1) is the successor to the Nimitz-class carrier design. The Ford-class design uses the basic Nimitz-class hull form but incorporates several improvements, including features permitting the ship to generate more aircraft sorties per day, more electrical power for supporting ship systems, and features permitting the ship to be operated by several hundred fewer sailors than a Nimitz-class ship, reducing 50-year life-cycle operating and support (O&S) costs for each ship by about $4 billion compared to the Nimitz-class design, the Navy estimates. Navy plans call for procuring at least four Ford-class carriers—CVN-78, CVN-79, CVN-80, and CVN-81. CVN-78 (Gerald R. Ford) CVN-78, which was named Gerald R. Ford in 2007,14 was procured in FY2008. The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget estimates the ship’s procurement cost at $13,316.5 million (i.e., about $13.3 billion) in then-year dollars. The ship was commissioned into service on July 22, 2017. The Navy is currently working to complete construction, testing, and certification of the ship’s 11 weapons elevators and to correct other technical problems aboard the ship. CVN-79 (John F. Kennedy) CVN-79, which was named John F. Kennedy on May 29, 2011,15 was procured in FY2013. The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget estimates the ship’s procurement cost at $11,397.7 million (i.e., contract for the construction of CVN-80 and CVN-81. This provision does not limit the total number of years across which incremental funding may be used to procure either ship. 12 For more on full funding and incremental funding, see CRS Report RL31404, Defense Procurement: Full Funding Policy—Background, Issues, and Options for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke and Stephen Daggett, and CRS Report RL32776, Navy Ship Procurement: Alternative Funding Approaches—Background and Options for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 13 Source for figures of 2,000 supplier firms in 46 states: Jennifer Boykin, president of HII/NNS, as quoted in Marcus Weisgerber, “US Navy Places First 2-Carrier Order in Three Decades,” Defense One, January 31, 2019. 14 §1012 of the FY2007 defense authorization act (H.R. 5122/P.L. 109-364 of October 17, 2006) expressed the sense of Congress that CVN-78 should be named for President Gerald R. Ford. On January 16, 2007, the Navy announced that CVN-78 would be so named. CVN-78 and other carriers built to the same design are consequently referred to as Ford (CVN-78) class carriers. For more on Navy ship names, see CRS Report RS22478, Navy Ship Names: Background for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 15 See “Navy Names Next Aircraft Carrier USS John F. Kennedy,” Navy News Service, May 29, 2011, accessed online on June 1, 2011, at http://www.navy.mil/search/display.asp?story_id=60686. See also Peter Frost, “U.S. Navy’s Next Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 5 about $11.4 billion) in then-year dollars. The ship is being built with an improved shipyard fabrication and assembly process that incorporates lessons learned from the construction of CVN-78. The ship is scheduled for delivery to the Navy in September 2024. Figure 1. USS Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78) Source: Navy photograph dated April 8, 2017, accessed October 3, 2017, at http://www.navy.mil/view_image.asp?id=234835. CVN-80 (Enterprise) CVN-80, which was named Enterprise on December 1, 2012,16 was procured in FY2018. The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget estimates the ship’s procurement cost at $12,335.1 million (i.e., about $12.3 billion) in then-year dollars. The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget estimates the ship’s procurement cost at $12,321.3 million (i.e., about $12.3 billion) in then-year dollars. The ship is scheduled for delivery to the Navy in March 2028. Aircraft Carrier Will Be Named After The Late John F. Kennedy,” Newport News Daily Press, May 30, 2011. CVN-79 is the second ship to be named for President John F. Kennedy. The first, CV-67, was the last conventionally powered carrier procured for the Navy. CV-67 was procured in FY1963, entered service in 1968, and was decommissioned in 2007. 16 The Navy made the announcement of CVN-80’s name on the same day that it deactivated the 51-year-old aircraft carrier CVN-65, also named Enterprise. (“Enterprise, Navy’s First Nuclear-Powered Aircraft Carrier, Inactivated,” Navy News Service, December 1, 2012; Hugh Lessig, “Navy Retires One Enterprise, Will Welcome Another,” Newport News Daily Press, December 2, 2012.) CVN-65 was the eighth Navy ship named Enterprise; CVN-80 is to be the ninth. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 6 CVN-81 (Doris Miller) CVN-81 was named Doris Miller on January 20, 2020, for an African American enlisted sailor who received the Navy Cross for his actions during the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941.17 CVN-81 is treated in this report as a ship that was procured in FY2019, consistent with congressional action on the Navy’s FY2019 budget. The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission shows CVN-81 as a ship that was procured in FY2020.18 Prior to the awarding of the two-ship block buy contract for CVN-80 and CVN-81 that is discussed in the next section, CVN-81 was scheduled to be procured in FY2023. The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates CVN-81’s procurement cost at $12,450.7 million (i.e., about $12.5 billion) in then-year dollars. The ship is scheduled for delivery to the Navy in February 2032. Two-Ship Block Buy Contract for CVN-80 and CVN-81 CVN-80 and CVN-81 are being procured under a two-ship block buy contract that was authorized by Section 121(a)(2) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (H.R. 5515/P.L. 115-232 of August 13, 2018). The provision permitted the Navy to add CVN-81 to the existing contract for building CVN-80 after the Department of Defense (DOD) made certain certifications to Congress. DOD made the certifications on December 31, 2018, and the Navy announced the award of the contract on January 31, 2019. Compared to the estimated procurement costs for CVN-80 and CVN-81 in the Navy’s FY2019 budget submission, the Navy estimated under its FY2020 budget submission that the two-ship block buy contract will reduce the cost of CVN-80 by $246.6 million and the cost of CVN-81 by $2,637.3 million, for a combined reduction of $2,883.9 million (i.e., about $2.9 billion).19 (DOD characterized the combined reduction as “nearly $3 billion.”20) Using higher estimated baseline costs for CVN-80 and CVN-81 taken from a December 2017 Navy business case analysis, the Navy estimated under its FY2020 budget submission that the two-ship contract will reduce the cost of CVN-80 by about $900 million and the cost of CVN-81 by about $3.1 billion, for a combined reduction of about $4.0 billion.21 These figures are all expressed in then-year dollars, meaning dollars that are not adjusted for inflation. For additional background information on the two-ship block buy contract, see Appendix A. Program Procurement Cost Cap Congress has established and subsequently amended procurement cost caps for CVN-78 class aircraft carriers.22 17 For further discussion of the naming of CVN-81 for Doris Miller, see CRS Report RS22478, Navy Ship Names: Background for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 18 For additional discussion of CVN-81’s year of procurement, see CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 19 Source: CRS calculation based on costs for single-ship purchases as presented in Navy’s FY2019 budget submission and costs for two-ship purchase as presented in the Navy’s FY2020 budget submission. 20 Source: Navy information paper on estimated cost savings of two-ship carrier buy provided to CRS by Navy Office of Legislative Affairs on June 20, 2019. 21 Navy information paper provided to CRS by Navy Office of legislative Affairs on June 20, 2019. 22 The provisions that established and later amended the cost caps are as follows: Section 122 of the FY2007 John Warner National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 5122/P.L. 109-364 of October 17, 2006) established a procurement cost cap for CVN-78 of $10.5 billion, plus adjustments for inflation and other factors, and a procurement cost cap for subsequent Ford-class carriers of $8.1 billion each, plus adjustments for inflation and Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 7 Program Procurement Funding Table 1 shows procurement funding for CVNs 78, 79, 80, and 81 through FY2028, the final year of funding programmed for CVN-81. As shown in the table, the Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $2,714.1 million (i.e., about $2.7 billion) in procurement funding for CVN-78 class ships, including $71.0 million for CVN-78, $997.5 million for CVN-80, and $1,645.6 million for CVN-81. other factors. The conference report (H.Rept. 109-702 of September 29, 2006) on P.L. 109-364 discusses Section 122 on pages 551-552. Section 121 of the FY2014 National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 3304/P.L. 113-66 of December 26, 2013) amended the procurement cost cap for the CVN-78 program to provide a revised cap of $12,887.0 million for CVN-78 and a revised cap of $11,498.0 million for each follow-on ship in the program, plus adjustments for inflation and other factors (including an additional factor not included in original cost cap). Section 122 of the FY2016 National Defense Authorization Act (S. 1356/P.L. 114-92 of November 25, 2015) further amended the cost cap for the CVN-78 program to provide a revised cap of $11,398.0 million for each follow-on ship in the program, plus adjustment for inflation and other factors, and with a new provision stating that, if during construction of CVN-79, the Chief of Naval Operations determines that measures required to complete the ship within the revised cost cap shall result in an unacceptable reduction to the ship’s operational capability, the Secretary of the Navy may increase the CVN-79 cost cap by up to $100 million (i.e., to $11.498 billion). If such an action is taken, the Navy is to adhere to the notification requirements specified in the cost cap legislation. Section 121(a) of the FY2018 National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 2810/P.L. 115-91 of December 12, 2017) further amended the cost cap for the CVN-78 program to provide a revised cap of $12,568.0 million for CVN-80 and subsequent ships in the program, plus adjustment for inflation and other factors. (The cap for CVN-79 was kept at $11,398.0 million, plus adjustment for inflation and other factors.) The provision also amended the basis for adjusting the caps for inflation, and excluded certain costs from being counted against the caps. Section 121 of the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (S. 1790/P.L. 116-92 of December 20, 2020) further amended the cost cap for the CVN-78 program to provide revised caps of $13,224. Million for CVN-78, $11,398.0 million for CVN–79, $12,202. Million for CVN–80, and $12,451.0 million for CVN–81. The provision directs the Navy to exclude from these figures costs for CVN–78 class battle spares, interim spares, and increases attributable to economic inflation after December 1, 2018. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 8 Table 1. Procurement Funding for CVNs 78, 79, 80, and 81 Through FY2028 (Millions of then-year dollars, rounded to nearest tenth) FY CVN-78 CVN-79 CVN-80 CVN-81 Total FY01 21.7 (AP) 0 0 0 21.7 FY02 135.3 (AP) 0 0 0 135.3 FY03 395.5 (AP) 0 0 0 395.5 FY04 1,162.9 (AP) 0 0 0 1,162.9 FY05 623.1 (AP) 0 0 0 623.1 FY06 618.9 (AP) 0 0 0 618.9 FY07 735.8 (AP) 52.8 (AP) 0 0 788.6 FY08 2,685.0 (FF) 123.5 (AP) 0 0 2,808.5 FY09 2,687.0 (FF) 1,210.6 (AP) 0 0 3,895.2 FY10 851.3 (FF) 482.9 (AP) 0 0 1,334.2 FY11 1,848.1 (FF) 902.5 (AP) 0 0 2,677.7 FY12 86.0 (FF)** 554.8 (AP) 0 0 554.8 FY13 0 491.0 (FF) 0 0 491.0 FY14 588.1 (CC) 917.6 (FF) 0 0 1,505.7 FY15 663.0 (CC) 1,219.4 (FF) 0 0 1,882.4 FY16 123.8 (CC) 1,569.5 (FF) 862.4 (AP) 0 2,555.7 FY17 0 1,241.8 (FF) 1,370.8 (AP) 0 2,612.6 FY18 20.0 (CC) 2,557.4 (FF) 1,569.6 (FF) 0 4,147.0 FY19 0 0 930.2 (FF) 643.0 (FF) 1,573.2 FY20 0 0 1,062.0 (FF) 1,214.5 (FF) 2,276.5 FY21 (requested) 71.0 (CC) 0 997.5 (FF) 1,645.6 (FF) 2,714.1 FY22 (programmed) 0 74.0 (CC) 1,014.1 (FF) 1,307.0 (FF) 2,395.1 FY23 (programmed) 0 0 1,166.1 (FF) 760.0 (FF) 1,926.1 FY24 (programmed) 0 0 1,047.9 (FF) 667.0 (FF) 1,714.9 FY25 (programmed) 0 0 2,300.6 (FF) 591.0 (FF) 2,891.6 FY26 (projected) 0 0 0 2,171.0 (FF) 2,171.0 FY27 (projected) 0 0 0 1,851.0 (FF) 1,851.0 FY28 (projected) 0 0 0 1,600.7 (FF) 1,600.7 Total 13,316.5 11,397.7 12,321.3 12,450.7 49,486.2 Source: Table prepared by CRS based on Navy’s FY2021 budget submission. Notes: Figures may not add due to rounding. “AP” is advance procurement funding; “FF” is full funding; “CC” is cost-to-complete funding (i.e., funding to cover cost growth), which is sometimes abbreviated in Navy documents as CTC. The funding figures shown in the CVN-78 column reflect reprogramming under the FY2021 budget submission of $161.5 million of additional funding into FY2009, FY2011, and FY2012. Regarding the ** notation for the FY2012 funding figure for CVN-78, even though FY2012 is after FY2011 (CVN-78’s original final year of full funding), the Navy characterizes the $86.0 million reprogrammed into FY2012 as full funding rather than cost-to-complete funding on the grounds that in the years since FY2011, as discussed earlier in this report (see footnote 11), the authority to use incremental funding for procuring aircraft carriers has been expanded by Congress to permit more than the four years of incremental funding that were permitted at the time that CVN-78 was initially funded. Changes in Estimated Unit Procurement Costs Since FY2008 Budget Table 2 shows changes in the estimated procurement costs of CVNs 78, 79, 80, and 81 since the budget submission for FY2008—the year of procurement for CVN-78. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 9 Table 2. Changes in Estimated Procurement Costs of CVNs 78, 79, 80, and 81 (As shown in FY2008-FY2020 budgets, in millions of then-year dollars) Budget CVN-78 CVN-79 CVN-80 CVN-81 Est. proc. cost Scheduled FY of proc. Est. proc. cost Scheduled FY of proc. Est. proc. cost Scheduled FY of proc. Est. proc. cost Scheduled FY of proc. FY08 10,488.9 FY08 9,192.0 FY12 10,716.8 FY16 n/a FY21 FY09 10,457.9 FY08 9,191.6 FY12 10,716.8 FY16 n/a FY21 FY10 10,845.8 FY08 n/a FY13 n/a FY18 n/a FY23 FY11 11,531.0 FY08 10,413.1 FY13 13,577.0 FY18 n/a FY23 FY12 11,531.0 FY08 10,253.0 FY13 13,494.9 FY18 n/a FY23 FY13 12,323.2 FY08 11,411.0 FY13 13,874.2 FY18 n/a FY23 FY14 12,829.3 FY08 11,338.4 FY13 13,874.2 FY18 n/a FY23 FY15 12,887.2 FY08 11,498.0 FY13 13,874.2 FY18 n/a FY23 FY16 12,887.0 FY08 11,347.6 FY13 13,472.0 FY18 n/a FY23 FY17 12,887.0 FY08 11,398.0 FY13 12,900.0 FY18 n/a FY23 FY18 12,907.0 FY08 11,377.4 FY13 12,997.6 FY18 n/a FY23 FY19 12,964.0 FY08 11,341.4 FY13 12,601.7 FY18 15,088.0 FY23 FY20 13,084.0 FY08 11,327.4 FY13 12,335.1 FY18 12,450.7 FY19 FY21 13,316.5 FY08 11,397.7 FY13 12,321.3 FY18 12,450.7 FY19 Annual % change FY08 to FY09 -0.3 0% 0% n/a FY09 to FY10 +3.7 n/a n/a n/a FY10 to FY11 +6.3 n/a n/a n/a FY09 to FY11 +26.7% FY11 to FY12 0% -1.5% -0.1% n/a FY12 to FY13 +6.9% +11.3% +2.8% n/a FY13 to FY14 +4.1% -0.6% 0% n/a FY14 to FY15 +0.5% +1.4% 0% n/a FY15 to FY16 0% -1.3% -2.9% n/a FY16 to FY17 0% +0.4% -4.2% n/a FY17 to FY18 +0.2% -0.2% +0.7% n/a FY18 to FY19 +0.4% -0.3% -3.0% n/a FY19 to FY20 +0.9% -0.1% -2.1% -17.5% FY20 to FY21 +1.8% +0.6% -0.1% 0% Cumulative % change through FY21 Since FY08 +27.0% +24.0% +15.0% n/a Since FY13 +8.1% -0.1% -11.2% n/a Since FY18 +3.2% +0.2% -5.2% n/a Since FY19 +2.7% +0.5% -2.2% -17.5% Source: Table prepared by CRS based on FY2008-FY2020 Navy budget submissions. n/a means not available. Notes: The FY2010 budget submission did not show estimated procurement costs or scheduled years of procurement for CVNs 79 and 80. The scheduled years of procurement for CVNs 79 and 80 shown here for the FY2010 budget submission are inferred from the shift to five-year intervals for procuring carriers that was announced by Secretary of Defense Gates in his April 6, 2009, news conference regarding recommendations for the FY2010 defense budget. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 10 Issues for Congress for FY2021 Potential Impact of COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Situation One issue for Congress concerns the potential impact of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation on the execution of U.S. military shipbuilding programs, including the CVN-78 program. For additional discussion of this issue, see CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Delay in CVN-78’s Deployment Due to Weapon Elevators and Other Problems Overview One oversight issue for Congress concerns a delay in CVN-78’s first deployment due to the need to complete the construction, testing, and certification of the ship’s weapons elevators and to correct other technical problems aboard the ship. Challenges in completing the construction, testing, and certification of CVN-78’s weapon elevators were first reported in November 2018,23 and the issue has been a matter of continuing oversight attention since then. The ship’s 11 weapons elevators—referred to as Advanced Weapons Elevators (AWEs)—move missiles and bombs from the ship’s weapon magazines up to the ship’s flight deck, so that they can be loaded onto aircraft that are getting ready to take off from the ship. A lack of working weapons elevators can substantially limit an aircraft carrier’s ability to conduct combat operations. The Navy has struggled since November 2018 to meet promises it has repeatedly made to the defense oversight committees to get the elevators completed, tested, and certified. For much of 2019, the Navy continued to report that 2 of the 11 weapon elevators were completed, tested, and certified.24 On October 23, 2019, the Navy reported that the figure had 23 See Anthony Capaccio, “U.S. Navy’s Costliest Carrier Was Delivered Without Elevators to Lift Bombs,” Bloomberg, November 2, 2018. 24 Sam LaGrone, “Carrier Ford Will Only Have Two Weapon Elevators Ready When it Leaves Shipyard,” USNI News, October 9, 2019. See also Anthony Capaccio, “On Costliest U.S. Warship Ever, Navy Can’t Get Munitions on Deck,” Bloomberg, July 30, 2019. (The article was also published by Bloomberg with the title “Flawed Elevators on $13 Billion Carrier Miss Another Deadline.”) Ben Werner, “Navy Says More Experts Coming to Work Ford Carrier Elevator Delays,” USNI News, July 5, 2019; Navy Research, Development and Acquisition Public Affairs Office, “Navy Full Court Press on USS Gerald R. Ford Weapons Elevators,” Navy News Service, July 1, 2019; Mark D. Faram, “The Navy’s New Plan to Fix Ford’s Elevators Failures,” Navy Times, July 1, 2019; Paul McLeary, “Navy Calls In Outsiders To Fix Troubled Ford Carrier,” Breaking Defense, July 1, 2019; Ben Werner and Sam LaGrone, “USS Gerald R. Ford Weapons Elevator Certifications Will Extend Pat October,” USNI News, May 29, 2019. See also Paul McLeary, “Will Trump Fire SecNav? Super Carrier USS Ford Suffers New Setback,” Breaking Defense, May 29, 2019; Rich Abott, “Ford Elevator Work Prioritized And Extending Past October,” Defense Daily, June 3, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “Navy Building a Land-Based Test Site for Ford-Class Weapons Elevators, But Timing Won’t Help CVN-78,” USNI News, May 31, 2019. For earlier press reports, see Anthony Capaccio, “U.S. Navy’s Costliest Carrier Was Delivered Without Elevators to Lift Bombs,” Bloomberg, November 2, 2018; Anthony Capaccio, “Flawed Bomb Elevators Leave Inhofe Leery of Buying Two Carriers,” Bloomberg, December 5, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “SECNAV to Trump: Ford Carrier Weapons Elevators Will Be Fixed by Summer, or ‘Fire Me,’” USNI News, January 8, 2019; USS Gerald R. Ford Public Affairs, “USS Gerald R. Ford Accepts First Advanced Weapons Elevator,” Navy News Service, January 16, 2019; Christopher Woody, “The Navy’s Newest Aircraft Carrier Got a Long-Missing Piece of Gear in December, Helping to Solve a Problem the Navy Secretary Has Bet His Job on Fixing,” Business Insider, January 20, 2019; Richard Sisk, “Navy Finally Has One Weapons Elevator Working on Its Newest Carrier,” Military.com, January 22, 2019; Mark D. Faram, Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 11 increased to 4 of 11.25 On April 22, 2020, the Navy announced that the fifth elevator had been certified, that the sixth is scheduled to be certified in the fourth quarter of FY2020, and that the remaining five are scheduled to be certified by the time that the ship undergoes Full Ship Shock Trials (FSSTs) in the third quarter of FY2021.26 The Navy states that lessons learned in building, testing, and certifying CVN-78’s AWEs will be applied to the AWEs of subsequent CVN-78 class carriers.27 In addition to challenges in building, testing, and certifying the ship’s weapon elevators, the Navy reportedly has been working to address problems with other systems on the ship, including its propulsion and electrical systems. Technical issues regarding the weapon elevators and other ship systems have delayed the ship’s first deployment to 2022 at the earliest, which would be about five years after the ship was commissioned into service.28 The delay in the ship’s first deployment is lengthening a period during which the Navy is attempting to maintain policymaker-desired levels of carrier forward deployments with its 10 other carriers—a situation that can lead to operational strains on those 10 carriers and their crews. In a December 6, 2019, memorandum, Acting Secretary of the Navy Thomas Modly stated that one of his five immediate objectives would be to “put all hands on deck to make [CVN-78] ready as a warship as soon as practically possible.”29 In a December 20, 2019, memorandum, Modly elaborated on this effort, stating that “With the successful completion of CVN 78’s Post Shakedown Availability and subsequent Independent Steaming Events, finishing work [on the ship] and delivering this capability to the fleet as quickly and effectively as possible is one of my highest priorities.” The memorandum established a series of specific tasks to be completed by certain dates, stated that “The Program Executive Office (PEO) Aircraft Carriers, RADM [Rear Admiral] Jim Downey, will be accountable for this Vector as supported activity,” and stated that “Once Beleaguered by Critics, the Ford Gets a Lift,” Navy Times, January 23, 2019; USS Gerald R. Ford (CVN 78) Public Affairs, “USS Gerald R. Ford Accepts Second Advanced Weapons Elevator,” Navy News Service, March 6, 2019; Mark D. Faram, “Why the Once-Maligned Flattop Ford Is Finally Getting a Lift (or 11),” Navy Times, March 7, 2019; Rich Abott, “Carrier Elevator Test Site Will Procure New Elevator, Ford Accepts Second Elevator,” Defense Daily, March 7, 2019; Rich Abott, “Navy To Build Land-Based Carrier Elevator Test Site,” Defense Daily, February 21, 2019. 25 Wesley Morgan, “Navy Secretary Accuses Congressional Critics of ‘Disinformation’ on Ford Carrier,” Politico Pro, October 23, 2019. See also Sam LaGrone, “Carrier Ford May Not Deploy Until 2024, 3rd Weapons Elevator Certified,” USNI News, October 22, 2019; Anthony Capaccio, “Trump Lets Navy’s Chief Off the Hook Over an Offer to ‘Fire Me,’” Bloomberg, November 2, 2019. 26 Program Executive Office Aircraft Carriers Public Affairs, “Fifth Advanced Weapons Elevator certified aboard USS Gerald R. Ford (CVN 78),” Navy News Service, April 22, 2020. See also Megan Eckstein, “Ford’s 5th Weapons Elevator Done With Testing; All 11 Should Be Done By Next Summer’s Shock Trials,” USNI News, April 16, 2020. On January 16, 2020, a Navy official reportedly stated that work on all 11 elevators will be completed by May 2021, although the official acknowledged that there is some risk in that schedule. (Mallary Shelbourne, “Navy Confident CVN-78 Will Have All Weapons Elevators by May 2021,” Inside Defense, January 16, 2020.) 27 See, for example, Ben Werner, “Navy Applying USS Gerald Ford Advanced Weapons Elevators Lessons to Rest of Carrier Class,” USNI News, April 22, 2020. 28 An October 25, 2019, press report stated that Navy officials “are taking a hard look at what’s next and if there’s enough time for Ford to meet remaining milestones and necessary to deploy sometime in 2022—which as of now is still the target….” (Mark D. Faram, “Carrier Ford Underway For Tests as Navy Mulls Future Schedule,” Defense & Aerospace Report, October 25, 2019.) 29 Thomas B. Modly, memorandum for distribution, subject “SecNav [Secretary of the Navy] Vector 1,” December 6, 2019, p. 1. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 12 “Our first ‘Make Ford Ready’ summit will occur on January 9, 2020, with every stakeholder in government and industry present.”30 On February 27, 2020, Navy leaders testified that With the successful completion of CVN 78’s Post Shakedown Availability and subsequent Independent Steaming Events, finishing our work and delivering this capability to the fleet as quickly and effectively as possible is one of DON’s [the Department of the Navy’s] highest priorities. The Navy has learned with each test and is consistently bringing each of the innovative systems online. FORD is currently undergoing final air compatibility testing, bringing the entire carrier air wing onboard and progressing towards her maiden deployment.31 Potential Oversight Questions Potential oversight questions for Congress include the following:  Why did the Navy accept delivery of CVN-78 from the shipbuilder and commission the ship into service if most or all of its weapon elevators were not completed, tested, and certified?  What steps has the Navy taken since CVN-78 was delivered to the Navy on May 31, 2017, to keep Congress informed of challenges regarding the ship’s weapon elevators and other ship systems?  Why is it taking so long to complete, test, and certify the weapon elevators?  How much is it costing to complete, test, and certify the weapon elevators, and will the Navy include all of this cost in the ship’s total reported procurement cost?  When will the ship start its first deployment, and how much of a delay will that represent compared to the ship’s original schedule for starting its first deployment?  How much additional operational stress is the delay in CVN-78’s first deployment placing on the Navy’s 10 other aircraft carriers?  What steps is the Navy taking to ensure that a similar situation does not arise regarding the construction and initial deployments of CVN-79, CVN-80, and CVN-81? Recent Press Reports An October 22, 2019, press report states: USS Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78) may not be ready to deploy until 2024, further complicating the Navy’s persistent problems of generating deployable carriers from the East Coast. Ford’s originally planned deployment date was 2018, but that timeline has continued to slip due largely to developmental delays in the new technologies that were included aboard the first-in-class nuclear aircraft carrier. The delays are also in part due to the Department of Defense’s decision for Ford to undergo full-ship shock trials before its first deployment. 30 Thomas B. Modly, memorandum for distribution, subject “SecNav [Secretary of the Navy] Vector 3,” December 20, 2019. 31 Statement of the Honorable Thomas B. Modly, Acting Secretary of the Navy, Admiral Michael M. Gilday, Chief of Naval Operations, [and] General David H. Berger, Commandant of the U.S. Marine Corps, on [the] Fiscal Year 2021 Department of the Navy Budget before the House Armed Services Committee, February 27, 2020, p. 29. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 13 The news of the later deployment date came during a Tuesday House Armed Services readiness subcommittee hearing in an exchange between Naval Sea Systems Command head Vice Adm. Tom Moore and Rep. Elaine Luria (D-Va.). “The original deployment was 2018 and best estimates we’re looking at 2024?” Luria asked Moore during the hearing. “I think we’ll beat that,” Moore said. “We’re going to pull back as far to the left [i.e., earlier] as we can, but I think we’re going to beat that.” The initial estimated deployment date is still under review, pending a decision by Chief of Naval Operations Adm. Mike Gilday in consultation with Moore and James Geurts, assistant secretary of the Navy for research, development and acquisition, Geurts told reporters following the hearing. “I want to make sure the new CNO has got an opportunity to review that plan and make sure he and I are both comfortable with it,” Geurts told USNI News after the hearing.32 An October 23, 2019, press report states: Navy Secretary Richard Spencer defended the long-delayed USS Gerald R. Ford aircraft carrier Wednesday [October 23] and shot back at critics, suggesting that pointed remarks on Capitol Hill Tuesday amounted to “disinformation.” “The ship will be ready to serve and do what it’s going to do in the time that the CNO thinks is appropriate, and it’s going to be sooner than 2024,” Spencer told an audience at the Brookings Institution, referring to Chief of Naval Operations Adm. Michael Gilday. That’s the latest estimate for when the Ford will deploy for the first time. The carrier was originally scheduled to be able to deploy in 2018. Former Navy officer Rep. Elaine Luria (D-Va.) offered a blistering criticism of the delays Tuesday [October 22], calling the vessel a “$13 billion nuclear-powered floating berthing barge” during a hearing with Vice Adm. Thomas Moore of Naval Sea Systems Command and Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development, and Acquisition James Geurts. “I look at her and other leadership on the Hill who continually disparage the Ford as a program and I get a little angry,” Spencer said, noting that the 2024 date refers to when the carrier’s air wing will be aboard and certified for operations, not when the warship itself will be ready. The carrier will be “sent to the fleet much earlier than that,” he said. “You could not ask for a better disinformation program for our competitors” than criticism from congressional critics that underplays the Ford’s potential, he added. “We’re going to work this out,” Spencer continued, calling the carrier an “efficiency game-changer” and emphasized that of its 11 weapons elevators, long a sticking point for the ship, “this morning we signed elevator No. 4 over” and “elevators 5 and 6 are moving in the ship.” Moore and Geurts said Tuesday [October 22] that three of the elevators have been certified for use.33 An October 24, 2019, press report stated: The plight of the very expensive and very late Gerald R. Ford aircraft carrier ignited a war of words between U.S. lawmakers and Navy leaders this week…. 32 Sam LaGrone, “Carrier Ford May Not Deploy Until 2024, 3rd Weapons Elevator Certified,” USNI News, October 22, 2019. 33 Wesley Morgan, “Navy Secretary Accuses Congressional Critics of ‘Disinformation’ on Ford Carrier,” Politico Pro, October 23, 2019. See also Ben Werner, “SECNAV Spencer Rebuts Congressional Criticism of Ford Carrier Program,” USNI News, October 23, 2019; Paul McCleary, “Navy Secretary Rips Hill, Says Shipbuilder HI Has ‘No Idea,’” Breaking Defense, October 23, 2019. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 14 At an event Wednesday [October 23], Navy Secretary Richard Spencer bristled at Luria’s criticism of the “massively complex systems” on Ford. Speaking at a Brookings Institution think tank event, he said such complaints left him feeling that he “could not ask for a better disinformation program for our competitors.” “The way we went to the moon was because the country was behind this, to get us to the moon with new technology,” Spencer said. “We’re going to work this out.” Ford’s innovative high-tech catapults have not only bedeviled engineers trying to perfect them but have also irked President Donald Trump, who said in 2017 that the carrier’s electromagnetic system should return to “goddamned steam.” Spencer blamed Congress Wednesday for ever putting a price cap on the carrier, which he likened to making a deal to get your house painted for $100 and then offering the painter only $75. “I would love to know that Congress understands what a price cap does,” Spencer added. Spencer also laid into [Representative Elaine] Luria for not offering to help. “I consider that disparaging,” he said. Luria’s Capitol Hill team responded that, during Tuesday’s hearing, she offered to do just that. “We want to be here for readiness to provide you the tools to get the carriers out to deploy on time,” she told Moore and Assistant Navy Secretary for Research, Development and Acquisition James Geurts. “What else do you need to do that?” On Wednesday, Spencer also denounced how lawmakers—who he refers to as his “board of directors”—only blame the Navy for the Ford’s failures. “I love the fact that…Congress turns around and says, ‘Navy, this is your fault,’” he said. “I have an extra seat up there when I testify, and I have not seen Huntington Ingalls-Newport News called up on the Hill to testify on the outrage my board of directors sees on the Ford.” In a statement released Wednesday night, Luria said she was disappointed that Spencer “finds Congressional oversight disparaging.” “Here are the facts: The USS FORD will be six years delayed in its initial deployment, which causes incredible strain on the carrier fleet,” she said.34 An October 27, 2019, press report stated: The Navy was kept in the dark by Huntington Ingalls’ leadership about the severity of engineering issues with Advanced Weapons Elevators on the aircraft carrier Gerald R. Ford according to Navy’s top civilian official speaking with reporters Sunday [October 27] at Naval Station Norfolk. Secretary of the Navy Richard Spencer minced no words after being questioned about the Ford’s struggles and recent lawmaker comments about the ship shortly after arriving back ashore from a several hour visit to the ship, which is undergoing trials off the Virginia Coast…. 34 Geoff Ziezulewicz, “SECNAV, Lawmaker Trade Barbs on Ford Flattop Woes,” Navy Times, October 24, 2019. See also Justin Katz, “Spencer Unloads on Congress, HII Following Navy Testimony on Ship Maintenance,” Inside Defense, October 23, 2019. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 15 Spencer lauded the work being done on the ship by what he described as an “energized” and “seamless” team of sailors and civilian yard workers working together ”to knock down these problems.” His ire, he said, is with leadership at Huntington Ingalls and the shipyard for not communicating the problem up front. “My issue is with senior management, the board of directors,” Spencer said. “I do not believe that we did have an understanding of their understanding of the issue, as translated to us all through the fall [of calendar year 2018).” The company originally promised the ship’ post-shakedown availability would end this past July 15, Spencer said, telling the Navy they were “fairly confident they’re going to get all the elevators done.” That forecast changed in March, Spencer said, when “all of a sudden” the shipyard informed the Navy the elevators wouldn’t be completed until sometime in 2021 or 2022. “That was a bit of a gut blow, which questioned in my mind, do they really know what the problem is?” Spencer said and adding “Navy came in and did what we should have done earlier” and “took control of the situation completely as it pertains to the elevator program” and “we got the issues knocked down.” Huntington Ingalls didn’t comment directly on Spencer’s words, saying instead that the Ford, as a “first-in-class ship” has had “many unique challenges” according to Beci Brenton, spokeswoman for for the company. While “most things have gone very well,” she said, “Some of the newer technologies have been more challenging than anticipated. She echoed Spencers comments saying the company and the Navy have been “working closely” to resolve issues as they arise and praised the efforts of the shipbuilders finding fixes. “With respect to the advanced weapon elevators, we have four certified elevators turned over to the Navy, and we are on a path to complete the remaining seven in the coming months,” she said. “We will continue to support our Navy partner in their preparations for the ship’s deployment.” Spencer said he believes the ship and the program have turned a corner in recent months and the worst is behind…. To date, he said, the ship has “seven moving elevators, of which four are certified” and handed over to the ship with “three others that are under various forms of testing.” When asked how long now before the ship is combat-ready, Spencer said “I’ll let you know” saying the ship can’t become combat ready until she is “given to the Navy” and put through a full work-up cycle. That’s because of necessary milestones in the ship’s immediate future, such as “Post Delivery Tests and Trials, Full Ship Shock Trials”, and a “Planned Incremental [Maintenance] Availability,” which all must happen before the ship can begin working up for deployment, officials told Defense & Aerospace Report this week. But that work-up and deployment, Spencer said, is “going to be way before 2024, I guarantee you that.”… “The issues with the elevators that we’re slaving away with, when we find a fix here is being immediately walked over to the Kennedy [CVN-79],” he said. “I think what you’re going to see is learning put into action with Kennedy, and you’ll see it out quicker.”35 35 Mark D. Faram, “SECNAV: Huntington Ingalls Leadership Misled Navy on Ford Elevator Issues,” Defense & Aerospace Report, October 27, 2019. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 16 An October 28, 2019, press report stated: The US Navy’s top acquisition official was upbeat as he met with media Monday [October 28] in his Pentagon office. He was just back after a quick trip to the long-troubled aircraft carrier Gerald R Ford (CVN 78), now underway off the Virginia coast on sea trials after 15 months in a shipyard…. [Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development and Acquisition James Geurts] added that the four operationally-certified elevators are the three upper-stage elevators plus a utility elevator also used for medical evacuations. Seven more lower-stage elevators continue to receive attention, with three of those nearing certification, he said. But it will still be about a year and a half before all 11 elevators are certified and in full operation, he cautioned. Of the ship’s other systems, the Dual Band Radar (DBR), a unique feature on the Ford, “has been up and operating while at sea, tracking targets. Feeling pretty good about that,” he said. Geurts also said he was pleased with progress on the Electromagnetic Aircraft Launch System (EMALS) and Advanced Arresting Gear (AAG), two more key new technologies on the carrier. New elements have been put in place on the arresting gear, he said, and land-based testing of the systems continues at an ever-growing pace. Flight operations on the Ford, he said, should resume shortly after the turn of the year, adding the goal is to work the system hard. The ship’s propulsion system already is being checked out, Geurts noted. “We’ve been at full power, we’ve tested the [main shaft] bearings, we’ve tested the throttles, everything looks solid,” he said, knocking a wooden table while adding the main turbine generators and the propulsion plant also look good. Geurts expressed confidence that a dispute between HII and General Electric about responsibilities with problems in the ship’s propulsion plant will be worked out between the companies, with no additional costs to the Navy…. Asked for examples of where the cost cap might have prevented needed work from being done in a timely fashion, Geurts pointed to “some of the prototyping, some of the risk reduction. “With a cost cap you can actually cause a behavior that suppresses information,” he said. “People don’t want to bring bad news to the boss. I’m much more for transparency so you can make decisions. “I just worry sometimes the intended behavior might not be the resultant behavior,” he added. “Cost cap as a management mechanism may not be the best way to drive that.” During the Ford’s post-shakedown availability—a planned post-delivery shipyard period where Navy ships return to the yard to correct deficiencies discovered in their initial, shakedown, period and receive additional work—Newport News shipbuilders essentially defined a new shipyard trade of specialists working on the advanced elevators, which will be installed on the Kennedy, Enterprise and all future carriers in addition to the Ford. “The shipyard has created a kind of trade school for elevators now,” Geurts said. “I am pretty optimistic that HII is setting up almost a specific trade, with specific training and a specific focus on this. That work force can now move from ship to ship and kind of be the AWE super geniuses as opposed to having to retrain tradesmen in this rather unique skill.” A full, land-based test site is also being built by the Navy in Philadelphia to further test the technology. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 17 “I think that’s where we missed it,” Geurts said of the AWE problems on the Ford. “The technology itself is not that exotic. The construction and getting the construction sequence right and having that planned very, very specifically, is what we really learned on 78. “The other challenge is there isn’t a huge degree of commonality between the eleven elevators, so you don’t really get as much learning between elevators on the single ship, you get learning on the elevators across a class of ships.”36 An October 29, 2019, press report stated that The Navy’s top acquisition official said all the of the delayed advanced weapons elevators (AWEs) on the USS Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78) will be finished and operational by the time an 18-month post-deliver test and trials (PDT&T) period finishes. Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development and Acquisition James Geurts told media during a roundtable Oct. 28 that as of Oct. 27, when he and Secretary of the Navy Richard Spencer visited the Ford, it was about 50 percent through its sea trials and is expected back to the naval base by the mid-week. The carrier first went back to sea for sea trials after finishing its post-shakedown availability (PSA) repair and maintenance period on Oct. 25…. After finishing these trials, it will undergo a nominal 18-month PDT&T period where the crew and air wing will get certified and get the ship ready for carrier strike group workups. Flight operations will start on CVN-78 in the next calendar year to recertify the flight deck, fuel systems and overall prepare for flight operations. Geurts admitted there is carryover work on the long-delayed elevators, but he was sure they will be finished before the ship is deployed and the Navy-industry team have a better handle on them going forward. “We do have a little carryover work and so we did work our way through elevators,” with four turned over to the crew and seven left to finish installation and certification. Geurts said the Navy has cycled the finished elevators over 200 times since the Ford started these trials. They are “operating fine at sea and all that but we’ll continue to shake those systems out.” He noted shipbuilder and AWE builder Huntington Ingalls Industries [HII’ has personnel on board during the trials to work on the seven remaining elevators “proving exactly how to do that while at sea & how to pre-stage equipment the right way.” Geurts said three of the lower elevators are in varying states of final construction and when he visited HII was testing one. “So we’re taking advantage of that and working as an integrated team out there.” Geurts underscored the Navy-HII team’s output over the last 90-100 days “has been on a much better path than we were previously and that’s why I am cautiously optimistic on both progress to get the rest of the Ford ones done and then be able to accelerate through 79 through 81.” Last week, Spencer said the Navy started making more progress on the AWEs once a service team took over the project but also strongly criticized HII management…. Geurts said the Navy and HII have had to work together “to get the right team focused on elevators. The Navy put a dedicated team down there, HII has recognized we’ve got to get 36 Christopher P. Cavas, “Heady Days for US Navy’s Carrier Program,” Defense & Aerospace Report, October 28, 2019. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 18 both build, grow and sustain a dedicated workforce to get after those and be a little bit bolder in our action.”… Geurts explained several risk reduction measures the Navy and HII have undertaken to speed up the elevator work. Some changes are “design tweaks for producibility.” Previously, the AWE door hinges were welded on every time so when you reset the door they had to unweld them and then reposition them. “It actually was one of the submarine experts came over from HII and looked at it and now kind of moving to movable fittings so you can kind of get the fitting right and then do the welds so you can adjust it easier.” The Navy has also built a full digital twin of the AWE software. “That’s already up and running, so we can run the software and get the software stable and test it. And then longer term we’re building a land-based test site up in Philly.”37 An October 30, 2019, press report stated: The Secretary of the Navy today said the cost cap on the first Ford-class aircraft carrier helped lead to problems resulting in delays to the advanced weapons elevators (AWEs) and explained the government’s issues and changing strategy with the shipbuilder. Secretary of the Navy Richard Spencer said on Wednesday at a Heritage Foundation press roundtable that the Navy and shipbuilder/AWE builder Huntington Ingalls Industries [HII] planned to build a test elevator site, similar to the electromagnetic advanced landing system (EMALS) located in Lakehurst, N.J. The Navy has used Joint Base McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst to test the General Atomics advanced arresting gear (AAG) and EMALS [electromagnetic aircraft launch system] hundreds of times before testing them on the first new carrier, the USS Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78). “Then we had the cost cap come in. And as [HII president and CEO] Mike Petters can say, you know fine, the cost cap comes in and no one builds the land site [weapon] elevator. We had to cut costs somewhere. Sometimes we’re our own worst enemy,” Spencer said…. Spencer said he thinks about it and wonders if anyone was expecting there to be second and third order effects of a cost cap. “You don’t get anything for free and you’re not going to drive quality by cost cap. We have to start thinking differently when we go to cost control.”… On Monday [October 28], Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development and Acquisition James Geurts said the Navy-HII team’s output on the elevators has been much better in the last few months and he was cautiously optimistic on progress of the Ford elevators…. Spencer said in fall 2018 the Navy was finalizing the HII elevator plan. The company gave him a chart that said all 11 AWEs would be tested and certified by the end of the planned post-shakedown availability (PSA), which was then planned for July 15. He said HII management reported high confidence of this timeline while Naval Reactors told him due to throttle and bearing issues the PSA would likely be pushed into September or October, “so I had more margin there. Did I feel confident? Completely confident.” 37 Rich Abott, “Geurts: Ford Elevators Done By 18-Month Post-Delivery Trial End, New Team Working,” Defense Daily, October 29, 2019. See also Ben Werner, “Navy Rethinking Need For Dual-Phase Carrier Delivery,” USNI News, October 29, 2019. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 19 Then, in January, Spencer said he made a bet with President Trump that the AWEs would be finished with the PSA or he could be fired…. Spencer explained this was meant to rally the shipbuilders. “What we weren’t seeing down there was the spring in the step of the people on the waterfront, to be very frank with you. It was business as usual. So we said ok, here’s a rally point, we’re going to commit to this.” However, in May 2019 he said HII management “goes oops, here we are, elevators aren’t going to be ready until the end of 2020, possibly 2021. And that’s when I went, do they really know what they’re doing?” Spencer called that a moment of inflection and called Thomas Fargo, chairman of the board of HII, asking if the board knew what was going on with management “because out trust and confidence on this specific project of the elevators has eroded significantly.” While Spencer said Fargo said yes, there were continued frustrations on the government side. “That’s when Hondo [Geurts] and I said let’s get a tiger team down there and let’s take this over as the general contractor and HII can sub[contract] to us [i.e., the Navy]. And that’s basically what’s happened this last 3 months.” Spencer said he went to the president and, after explaining the situation, was told “it’s a complex system, keep knocking down the dragons.”38 Another October 30, 2019, press report stated that at the press roundtable, Spencer noted that CVN-78 is the first ship in its class: “It’s first of class.… First of class is tough. If I look at what we’re doing to [the second-in-class ship, the future John F. Kennedy (CVN-79)], we’re down 3.2 million man-hours for where Ford was[, an] 18 percent decrease. You look at what we’re doing on the elevators, what we’re picking up on—here’s a fine example to the way to look at it: on the elevators, one of the problems was we have to get a two-pound pressure differential in each deck on three-ton doors. Well, the way they designed it is you actually have to weld and cut the hinge to adjust it. Well, now we’re doing a hanging hinge on Kennedy. So we’re taking learning [from CVN-78] to the ship [CVN-79]. I’d be remiss if I’d say that’s the last (funding request), to be very frank; I’d rather have the option to say we’re going to come for more than to say we’re capped off now. I feel good on what we’re finally learning on the end of this.”39 Another October 30, 2019, press report resulting from the press roundtable stated: Refusing to backtrack from previous criticisms and admitting anew he has questioned if executives at Huntington “really know what they’re doing,” Spencer did signal a new detente with a congresswoman [Representative Elaine Luria] he sparred with recently about the Ford class, however…. In a thaw in the relationship however, on Tuesday Luria and Navy acquisition boss James Geurts met in her Capitol Hill office to go over the Navy’s plans to fix seven of the ship’s 11 electromagnetic weapons elevators. Luria spokesman Chris Carroll told me it was “a positive meeting,” adding his boss “still has strong concerns about progress on the Ford.” 38 Rich Abott, “SECNAV: Ford Issues Due To Cost Cap, Explains Timeline,” Defense Daily, October 30, 2019. See also Megan Eckstein, “SECNAV Spencer: Carrier Ford Challenges Tied to Costs Caps, Requirements Process,” USNI News, October 30, 2019; Paul McCleary, “SecNav Again Blasts Huntington Ingalls On Ford Carriers,” Breaking Defense, October 30, 2019. 39 Megan Eckstein, “SECNAV Spencer: Carrier Ford Challenges Tied to Costs Caps, Requirements Process,” USNI News, October 30, 2019. Ellipsis as in original. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 20 Geurts’ spokesman Capt. Danny Hernandez said the Navy would keep conversations with members of Congress private. Speaking at a breakfast event at the Heritage Foundation today, Spencer sought to play down the feud, telling reporters the back-and-forth was the result of ”frustration on both sides” over problems on the Ford, adding he shares her frustration over the ship’s problematic technologies and delayed schedule. Reporting on the status of various systems on the ship, another October 20, 2019, press report stated: The skipper of the world’s most technologically advanced aircraft carrier [Capt. John J. “Yank” Cummings] says the ship has “absolutely” turned the corner and is now ready to work towards full operational status. After a 15-month stint back in the shipyard where the ship was built, most of its plethora of new technology is now up and running. The ship is now ready to begin advanced trials as the crew and the Navy will now learn how to take Ford’s high-tech gear to the next level and earn a spot in the deployment rotation…. Cummings talked to media on board the ship today, moments after their five-day at sea period ended as the ship tied up at Naval Station Norfolk’s Pier 11. While underway… nearly all of her ship systems were put to the test, he said, and passed…. The past few days, according to to the Naval Sea Systems Command’s Rear Adm. Jim Downey, the man in charge of overseeing the building and maintenance of the Navy’s flattop fleet, have proven the ship has finally worked out most of the kinks that have plagued the ship since even before it was commissioned in July of 2017. “The ship got underway right on schedule on Friday—conducted over 100 events over the the last few days and was very successful overall.” Up and running, he said, is the ship’s propulsion system that was put through the full range of testing both forward and backwards and even high-speed turns. There was no sign of the thrust bearing issues that led to breakdowns before the latest overhaul started. “Throttle control…performed very well, overall,” Downey said “All four [main turbine generators] were online all of those fixes were demonstrated at sea.” The navigation system got a workout and combat systems, which features the ship’s dual-band radar worked fine through its initial runs where it “tracked multiple targets.” And though all the Advanced Weapons Elevators aren’t fully operational, yet, Downey said that all eleven will be operating by the end of the “post delivery testing and trials phase” which is expected to wrap up in the next 18 months. While at sea, he said, the four elevators now fully operational got a workout while at sea. In addition, a fifth elevator, considered close close to certification was also run constantly and though it’s not fully certified, Downey said it “met all its requirements.”40 A January 30, 2020, press report stated: Over the past several months, the US Navy has been on a full-court press to show the world that its newest $14 billion super carrier isn’t a dud. Once sarcastically referred to as “Building 78,” senior leaders are stressing that the ship is well on its way to becoming a game-changing warship. 40 Mark D. Faram, “Carrier Ford Turns the Corner, Officials Say,” Defense & Aerospace Report, October 30, 2019. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 21 Earlier this week, Navy acquisition chief Hondo Geurts accompanied a small group of reporters to the ship, the latest batch of journalists to be given free access to the ship’s leadership and crew. Geurts, Ford’s commanding officer, Capt. JJ “Yank” Cummings, and his officers and sailors clearly telegraphed that the ship has indeed turned a corner thanks to a lot of hard work. Cumming’s first-class leadership has inspired the Ford team and imbued it with a can-do spirit to distance the ship’s troubled past and focus on its bright future. Geurts has focused on setting the conditions for long-term success by working with and incentivizing major contractors whether shipbuilder Huntington Ingalls Industries to catapult and arresting gear maker General Atomics to radar maker Raytheon and thousands of others to bend to the task. It is welcome news given delays getting the ship into the fleet has had a cascading effect, raising concerns whether the aging Nimitz and Eisenhower will have to remain in service longer. It is equally welcome that the Navy is finally realized the benefits of talking openly about its challenges and progress. The former lockdown on information only fueled rumor, speculation and lawmaker and journalists’ ire. Worse, it gave the appearance that the Navy was doing nothing to solve the Ford’s problems, only engaging fully a few months ago. Yes, Ford is expensive, late and over budget. She is also coming into service at a time when there is a robust debate about whether carriers constitute a critical capability or vulnerable liability. Acting Navy Secretary Tom Modly has been candid about his concerns about the vulnerability of the current carrier fleet—arguing that a new design may be necessary after the fourth of the class, the Doris Miller is delivered. That said, Modly has also made clear it’s vital the Navy get the Ford-class right. He’s right. For the foreseeable future, big-deck aircraft carriers will be critical national capability and capital asset around which the US Navy will be organized until the service determine what new kind of smaller ship would be knitted into a more distributed architecture…. Ford has made dramatic progress over the past months because of a prolonged post-shakedown availability that tackled engine, catapult, arresting gear and radar challenges. Sailors working closely with contractors and their Naval Sea Systems Command teammates were instrumental by applying their experience, innovative spirit and good old fashioned hard work. (Of 2,700 aboard Ford, 2,200 are crew and the remaining 500 are Navy personnel and contractors, 100 from HII alone.) It’s this approach that is systemically resolving the ship’s elevator problems. Sailors identified design and production problems, realigning guides, relocating and recalibrating limit switches to get three certified so far and another four by year’s end.41 Pricing of Proposed FY2021 Work on CVN-78 Program Another issue for Congress is whether the Navy has accurately priced the work it is proposing to do on the CVN-78 program in FY2021, particularly with regard to completing work on CVN-78 and implementing the two-carrier contract for CVN-80 and CVN-81. 41 Vago Muradian, “Learning Ford’s Lessons—Fast,” Defense & Aerospace Report, January 30, 2020. See also David B. Larter, “The Carrier Ford Is Trying to Shake Years of Controversy and Find Its Groove,” Defense News, January 30, 2020. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 22 Cost Growth and Managing Costs within Program Cost Caps Overview Another issue for Congress concerns cost growth in the CVN-78 program, Navy efforts to stem that growth, and Navy efforts to manage costs so as to stay within the program’s cost caps. The issue has been a continuing oversight issue for Congress several years. Congress in recent years has passed legislation on the issue that is in addition to the earlier-mentioned legislation that established and amended cost caps for the ships.42 As shown in Table 2, the estimated procurement costs of CVN-78, CVN-79, and CVN-80 have grown 27.0%, 24.0%, and 15.0%, respectively, since the submission of the FY2008 budget. As shown in Table 1, cost growth on CVN-78 required the Navy to program $1,394.9 million in cost-to-complete (CC) procurement funding for the ship in FY2014-FY2016 and FY2018,43 to request another $71.0 million in CC funding for CVN-78 for FY2021, and to program another $74 million in CC funding for CVN-79 for FY2022. As also shown in Table 2, however, cost growth on CVN-78, CVN-79, and CVN-80 has slowed since FY2013 and FY2014:  while the estimated cost of CVN-78 grew considerably between the FY2008 budget (the budget in which CVN-78 was procured) and the FY2014 budget, since the FY2014 budget, it has grown by only a small amount (3.8%);  while the estimated cost of CVN-79 grew considerably between the FY2008 budget and the FY2013 budget (in part because the procurement date for the ship was deferred by one year in the FY2010 budget),44 since the FY2013 budget it has declined by a small amount (0.11%); and  while the estimated cost of CVN-80 grew considerably between the FY2008 budget and the FY2013 budget (in part because the procurement date for the ship 42 This additional legislation includes: Section 128 of the FY2016 National Defense Authorization Act (S. 1356/P.L. 114-92 of November 25, 2015), which established a limitation on availability of funds for CVN–79 until certain conditions were met; Section 126 of the FY2017 National Defense Authorization Act (S. 2943/P.L. 114-328 of December 23, 2016), which established a limitation on availability of funds for procurement of CVN–80 until certain conditions were met; Section 121(b) of the FY2018 National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 2810/P.L. 115-91 of December 12, 2017), which provided for a waiver on the limitation of availability of funds for CVN–79; and Section 122 of the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (S. 1790/P.L. 116-92 of December 20, 2020), which modified the above-listed Section 126 of P.L. 114-328 regarding an annual report on cost targets for CVN-78 class carriers. 43 The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission reflects the reprogramming of $161.5 million of additional funding for CVN-78 into FY2009, FY2011, and FY2012, including $86.0 million reprogrammed into FY2012. As discussed earlier in the note to Table 1, even though FY2012 is after FY2011 (CVN-78’s original final year of full funding), the Navy characterizes the $86.0 million reprogrammed into FY2012 as full funding rather than cost-to-complete funding on the grounds that in the years since FY2011, as discussed earlier in this report (see footnote 11), the authority to use incremental funding for procuring aircraft carriers has been expanded by Congress to permit more than the four years of incremental funding that were permitted at the time that CVN-78 was initially funded. 44 Deferring the ship’s procurement from FY2012 to FY2013 put another year of inflation into the ship’s estimated cost in then-year dollars (which are the type of dollars shown in Table 2), and may have reduced production learning curve benefits in shifting from production of CVN-78 to production of CVN-79. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 23 was deferred by two years in the FY2010 budget),45 since the FY2013 budget it has declined by 11.2%. CVN-78 Past Sources of Cost Growth A primary source of past cost growth on CVN-78 appears to have been an unrealistically low original cost estimate for the ship in the FY2008 budget submission, which might have reflected an underestimate of the intrinsic challenges of building the then-new Ford-class design compared to those of building the previous and well understood Nimitz-class design.46 In addition to this general cause of past cost growth, additional and more-specific past risks of cost growth for CVN-78 included certain new systems to be installed on the ship whose development, if delayed, could delay the ship’s completion. These included a new type of aircraft catapult called the Electromagnetic Launch System (EMALS), a new aircraft arresting system called the Advanced Arresting Gear (AAG), and the ship’s primary radar, called the Dual Band Radar (DBR). Congress followed these and other sources of risk of cost growth on CVN-78 for years. Recent Press Reports An October 25, 2019, press report stated: 45 Deferring the ship’s procurement from FY2016 to FY2018 put additional years of inflation into the ship’s estimated cost in then-year dollars (which are the type of dollars shown in Table 2), and may have reduced production learning curve benefits in shifting from production of CVN-79 to production of CVN-80. 46 The Congressional Budget office (CBO) in 2008 and GAO in 2007 questioned the accuracy of the Navy’s cost estimate for CVN-78. CBO reported in June 2008 that it estimated that CVN-78 would cost $11.2 billion in constant FY2009 dollars, or about $900 million more than the Navy’s estimate of $10.3 billion in constant FY2009 dollars, and that if “CVN-78 experienced cost growth similar to that of other lead ships that the Navy has purchased in the past 10 years, costs could be much higher still.” CBO also reported that, although the Navy publicly expressed confidence in its cost estimate for CVN-78, the Navy had assigned a confidence level of less than 50% to its estimate, meaning that the Navy believed there was more than a 50% chance that the estimate would be exceeded. (Congressional Budget Office, Resource Implications of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2009 Shipbuilding Plan, June 9, 2008, p. 20.) GAO reported in August 2007 that Costs for CVN 78 will likely exceed the budget for several reasons. First, the Navy’s cost estimate, which underpins the budget, is optimistic. For example, the Navy assumes that CVN 78 will be built with fewer labor hours than were needed for the previous two carriers. Second, the Navy’s target cost for ship construction may not be achievable. The shipbuilder’s initial cost estimate for construction was 22 percent higher than the Navy’s cost target, which was based on the budget. Although the Navy and the shipbuilder are working on ways to reduce costs, the actual costs to build the ship will likely increase above the Navy’s target. Third, the Navy’s ability to manage issues that affect cost suffers from insufficient cost surveillance. Without effective cost surveillance, the Navy will not be able to identify early signs of cost growth and take necessary corrective action. (Government Accountability Office, Defense Acquisitions[:] Navy Faces Challenges Constructing the Aircraft Carrier Gerald R. Ford within Budget, GAO-07-866, August 2007, summary page. See also Government Accountability Office, Defense Acquisitions[:] Realistic Business Cases Needed to Execute Navy Shipbuilding Programs, Statement of Paul L. Francis, Director, Acquisition and Sourcing Management Team, Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Seapower and Expeditionary Forces, Committee on Armed Services, House of Representatives, July 24, 2007 (GAO-07-943T), p. 15.) Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 24 The Navy’s most expensive vessel is getting even costlier, as the service says it needs to add as much as $197 million more to correct deficiencies with the USS Gerald R. Ford aircraft carrier. That includes completing the installation and certification of 11 elevators to lift munitions and other equipment from below decks that were supposed to be ready more than two years ago. The previously undisclosed notification to Congress is on top of an extra $120 million identified in May 2018 to correct earlier deficiencies. The move last year caused the carrier to breach a $12.9 billion cost cap set by Congress in an effort to stop spiraling cost increases. The new request takes the carrier’s estimated cost to $13.22 billion. The latest funding is needed “to correct deficiencies identified during testing to ensure the safety of the ship and personnel and to deliver an operational ship to the fleet,” Captain Danny Hernandez, a Navy spokesman, said in a statement…. More money also is needed to pay for “additional labor to address and correct technical issues, completing deferred work,” and “there are also time charges associated with a longer repair period,” the Pentagon comptroller said in an Oct. 7 document to Congress requesting permission for the Navy to shift $40 million from prior-year programs. The remaining $157 million would come from funds this fiscal year and 2021, Hernandez said.47 An October 28, 2019, press report stated: A congressionally-imposed cost cap remains in place on the Ford, however, and the Navy in late September received permission to add $197 million to the ship’s acquisition cost, for a new total of $13.224 billion. The new monies were needed, the Navy said in a statement, “in order to correct deficiencies identified during testing, to ensure the safety of the ship and personnel, and to deliver an operational ship to the fleet.” The additional money also includes more for work on the elevators. The new money will come from the current 2019 budget and the future fiscal 2020 and 2021 budgets.48 An October 30, 2019, press report stated that Secretary of the Navy Richard Spencer, at a press roundtable on that date, said he has “medium confidence” that a recent $197 million reprogramming request to Congress to fund more Ford fixes will be enough, simply because “first of classes is tough.” “I’d be remiss if I said that was the last, to be very frank. I’d rather have the option to say we’re going to come for more than saying no we’re capped off now. I feel good on what we’re finally learning on the end of this birthing process,” Spencer said.49 47 Anthony Capaccio, “Navy’s $13 Billion Carrier Needs Another $197 Million in Fixes,” Bloomberg, October 25, 2019. 48 Christopher P. Cavas, “Heady Days for US Navy’s Carrier Program,” Defense & Aerospace Report, October 28, 2019. 49 Rich Abott, “SECNAV: Ford Issues Due To Cost Cap, Explains Timeline,” Defense Daily, October 30, 2019. See also Megan Eckstein, “SECNAV Spencer: Carrier Ford Challenges Tied to Costs Caps, Requirements Process,” USNI News, October 30, 2019; Paul McCleary, “SecNav Again Blasts Huntington Ingalls On Ford Carriers,” Breaking Defense, October 30, 2019. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 25 CVNs 79, 80, and 81 Confidence Levels The Navy states that it is working to control cost growth on CVNs 79, 80, and 81. Even so, the Navy states that its confidence levels for its estimated procurement costs (not including costs for class-wide spare parts) for CVNs 79, 80, and 81 were 36%, 22%, and 20% as of June 2019, respectively, meaning that the Navy as of June 2019 estimated that the risk of future cost growth on CVNs 79, 80, and 81 were 74%, 78%, and 80%, respectively.50 October 2019 CBO Report An October 2019 CBO report on the potential cost of the Navy’s 30-year shipbuilding plan states the following regarding the CVN-78 program: The Navy’s current estimate of the total cost of the USS Gerald R. Ford, the lead ship of the CVN-78 class, is $13.1 billion in nominal dollars appropriated over the period from 2001 to 2018. CBO used the Navy’s inflation index for naval shipbuilding to convert that figure to $16.2 billion in 2019 dollars, or 25 percent more than the corresponding estimate when the ship was first authorized in 2008. Neither the Navy’s nor CBO’s estimate includes the $5 billion in research and development costs that apply to the entire class. Because construction of the lead ship is finished, CBO used the Navy’s estimate for that ship to estimate the cost of successive ships in the class. But not all of the cost risk has been eliminated; in particular, the ship’s power systems, advanced arresting gear (the system used to recover fixed-wing aircraft landing on the ship), and weapons elevators are not yet working properly. It is not clear how much those problems will cost to fix, but current Navy estimates suggest that it will be several tens of millions of dollars or more. CBO does not have enough information to independently estimate those final repair costs. The next carrier after the CVN-78 is the CVN-79, the John F. Kennedy, which is expected to be completed in 2024 and deployed in 2026. Funding for the ship began in 2007, the Congress officially authorized its construction in 2013, and the planned appropriations for it were completed in 2018. The Navy estimates that the ship will cost $11.3 billion in nominal dollars (or $11.9 billion in 2019 dollars). The Navy’s 2014 selected acquisition report on the CVN-79 states that “the Navy and shipbuilder have made fundamental changes in the manner in which the CVN 79 will be built to incorporate lessons learned from CVN 78 and eliminate the key contributors to cost performance challenges realized in the construction of CVN 78.” Nevertheless, the Navy informed CBO that there is a greater than 60 percent chance that the ship’s final cost will be more than the current estimate. Although CBO expects the Navy to achieve a considerable cost reduction in the CVN-79 compared with the CVN-78, as is typical with the second ship of a class, CBO’s estimate is higher than the Navy’s. Specifically, CBO estimates that the ship will cost $12.4 billion in nominal dollars (or $12.9 billion in 2019 dollars), about 9 percent more than the Navy’s estimate. In 2018, the Congress authorized the third carrier of the class, the Enterprise (CVN-80). Appropriations for that ship began in 2016 and are expected to be complete by 2025. In 2019, the Congress authorized the Navy to purchase materials jointly for the CVN-80 and the next ship, the CVN-81, to save money by buying in greater quantity. It also authorized the Navy to change the sequencing involved in building the ships to gain greater efficiencies in their construction. Although that legislative action is known as a “two-carrier buy,” the Navy would not be building both ships at exactly the same time. Purchasing the two ships together would accelerate the CVN-81’s construction by only one 50 Source: Navy information paper provided to CRS by Navy Office of legislative Affairs on June 20, 2019. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 26 year compared with buying the ships individually as envisioned in the 2019 shipbuilding plan. In the 2020 budget, the Navy estimated that the CVN-80 would cost $12.3 billion in nominal dollars (or $11.4 billion in 2019 dollars). That represents a savings of $300 million compared with the Navy’s estimate in the 2019 budget. In contrast, CBO estimates that the CVN-80 would cost $13.6 billion in nominal dollars (or $12.4 billion in 2019 dollars), about 9 percent more than the Navy’s estimate. In information provided to CBO as part of the 2019 budget presentation, the Navy indicated that there was a greater than 60 percent chance that the ship’s final cost will be more than it estimated; in contrast, with the 2020 budget, the Navy puts that figure at 78 percent. Thus, it is not clear whether the service’s 2020 estimates incorporate savings stemming from a two-carrier buy or simply an acceptance of increased risk of future cost growth. With respect to the CVN-81, the pattern is similar. In the 2019 budget, the Navy estimated the CVN-81 at $15.1 billion in nominal dollars. In the 2020 budget with the two-carrier buy, the Navy estimated the cost of the ship at $12.6 billion in nominal dollars (or $10.5 billion in 2019 dollars), for a savings of $2.5 billion. However, the Navy also told CBO that there is an 80 percent chance that the final cost will be higher than the current estimate, compared with the roughly 40 percent chance indicated in the 2019 budget. CBO estimates that the CVN-81 would cost $14.4 billion in nominal dollars (or $11.9 billion in 2019 dollars), or 14 percent more than the Navy’s estimate. Overall, the Navy estimates an average cost of $12.7 billion (in 2019 dollars) for the 7 carriers (CVN-81 through CVN-87) in the 2020 shipbuilding plan. CBO’s estimate is $13.0 billion per ship….51 CVN-79 Navy officials have stated that they are working to control the cost of CVN-79 by equipping the ship with a less expensive primary radar,52 by turning down opportunities to add features to the ship that would have made the ship more capable than CVN-78 but would also have increased CVN-79’s cost, and by using a build strategy for the ship that incorporates improvements over the build strategy that was used for CVN-78. These build-strategy improvements, Navy officials have said, include the following items, among others:  achieving a higher percentage of outfitting of ship modules before modules are stacked together to form the ship;  achieving “learning inside the ship,” which means producing similar-looking ship modules in an assembly line-like series, so as to achieve improved production learning curve benefits in the production of these modules; and  more economical ordering of parts and materials including greater use of batch ordering of parts and materials, as opposed to ordering parts and materials on an individual basis as each is needed. A November 7, 2019, press report states: 51 Congressional Budget Office, An Analysis of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2020 Shipbuilding Plan, October 2019, pp. 17-19. 52 See, for example, Megan Eckstein, “PEO Carriers: CVN-79 Will Have a New Radar, Save $180M Compared to [CVN-78’s] Dual Band Radar,” USNI News, March 17, 2015; Christopher P. Cavas, “Dual Band Radar Swapped Out In New Carriers,” Defense News, March 17, 2015; Christopher P. Cavas, “New US Carrier Radar Enters the Picture,” Defense News, March 23, 2015. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 27 It was a joyous day for Mike Butler and his enormous crew of shipyard workers who have labored for the past four years to build America’s next super carrier. The program director for CVN-79, the future aircraft carrier John F. Kennedy, donned a hardhat and briefed assembled members of the press on Oct. 29, eager to tout the progress he and his colleagues made. “Today we’re going to flood the dock, it’s the first time the ship will be in the water since we started construction, since we started in August 2015,” Butler said. “It will take about 10 hours. Dock holds about 160 million gallons of water, so it will take some time to get in here. … And we’re flooding the dock about three months ahead of schedule, so that’s a great accomplishment for our folks.” Kennedy is about 1,300 tons heavier than the aircraft carrier Gerald R. Ford was at the same point in its life span, and Butler said that’s an indication of Kennedy’s solid progress. “There was a significant amount of change and improvements in how we built this ship that are helping us build this ship cheaper than we have on CVN-78,” he said, referring to the Ford. For Butler and his workforce at Huntington Ingalls Industries’ Newport News, Virginia, shipyard, the Kennedy is a chance to right the ship and demonstrate the yard can learn from its challenges with Ford, even as the first-in-class aircraft carrier has become embroiled in yet another controversy over delays.… “The main thing we did was shift more work earlier in the process,” Butler said. “We moved a lot of work traditionally done on the ship to our final assembly platen, and that moved it to an area more conducive to better efficiency and better cost. We got a lot of that work done earlier than we had done before. “That allows us to build larger super-lifts and put more outfitting in before we erected them on the ship.” The new approach at Newport News has been empowered by digital renderings that allow workers to build out spaces with a greater level of detail before piecing together the ship. “The main difference is with the product model, early on with the 3D-designed product model—without that we could not have moved so much work earlier. For example, with Nimitz class, we had a lot of hole cuts in bulkheads for piping and electrical to pass through. On Nimitz class, most of that was cut on the ship. Here, we cut virtually all those holes in the shop. We mounted a lot of equipment in the shop. We could have never done that without the product model. “And without the product model, we would have never been able to do the digital work packages and things that we are able to do electronically.” One of the major issues facing Newport News has been its relatively inexperienced labor force. Many of the older, most skilled workers are retiring. That, coupled with a reduction in the Navy’s overall shipbuilding needs in past decades, has put pressure on the remaining pool of skilled labor from which shipyards like Newport News can draw. That’s prompted hiring of new workers and training of a new generation of skilled workers in places such as Connecticut’s General Dynamics Electric Boat and in Hampton Roads, Virginia. However, the delays associated with training new workers who perform tasks more slowly than a more experienced workforce can impact the final cost of a ship, either sticking the Navy with a higher bill or taking a bite out of company profits, depending on how a contract is structured. “Big picture is that it’s not really a challenge [having a green workforce],” Butler said. “We’ve hired about 8,000 people in the last couple of years. Of course, that means we have Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 28 to bring them in and train them to be shipbuilders, which takes some time, but there is an advantage to having a new and younger workforce. “Especially as we move to more digital, electronic work packages. The younger workforce is much more adept at that, and it’s working very well.”53 Issues Raised in December 2019 DOT&E and May 2019 GAO Reports Another oversight issue for Congress concerns CVN-78 program issues raised in a December 2019 report from DOD’s Director, Operational Test and Evaluation (DOT&E)—DOT&E’s annual report for FY2019—and the 2019 edition of the Government Accountability Office’s (GAO’s) annual report surveying selected DOD weapon acquisition programs, which was published in May 2019. December 2019 DOT&E Report Regarding the CVN-78 program, the December 2019 DOT&E report stated the following in part: Assessment • As noted in previous annual reports, the test schedule has been aggressive. This year, the planned schedule slipped over a year. The recent extension in Planned Ship Availability delayed both phases of initial operational testing until FY22, and pushed the ship’s first deployment to FY23. Reliability • Four of CVN 78’s new systems stand out as being critical to flight operations: EMALS, AAG, DBR, and AWE. Overall, the poor reliability demonstrated by AAG and EMALS and the uncertain reliability of DBR and AWE could further delay CVN 78 IOT&E. Reliability estimates derived from test data for EMALS and AAG are discussed in following subsections. Since CVN 78 spent FY19 in the shipyard for PSA, the Navy has not conducted additional aircraft launches or recoveries from the ship. For DBR and AWE, only engineering reliability estimates have been provided. EMALS • Through the first 747 shipboard launches, EMALS suffered 10 critical failures. This is well below the requirement for Mean Cycles Between Critical Failures, where a cycle represents the launch of one aircraft. The Navy identified 9 unique Incident Reports (IRs) that resulted in the 10 critical failures for EMALS. Of the nine IRs, one fix was installed during PSA and is in place to support flight operations during CVN 78’s Post Delivery Test and Trials (PDT&T). Four IRs will be corrected commencing in late FY20. The four remaining IRs occurred only once during pre-PSA operations, are deemed low priority, and will be monitored during future flight operations. • The reliability concerns are exacerbated by the fact that the crew cannot readily electrically isolate EMALS components during flight operations due to the shared nature of the Energy Storage Groups and Power Conversion Subsystem inverters on board CVN 78. The process for electrically isolating equipment is time-consuming; spinning down the EMALS motor/generators takes 1.5 hours by itself. The inability to readily electrically isolate equipment precludes EMALS maintenance during flight operations. 53 David B. Larter, “Amid the Latest Ford Controversy, a Green Workforce Is Making Rapid Progress on Its Sister Ship,” Defense News, November 7, 2019. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 29 AAG • The Program Office redesigned major components that did not meet system specifications during land-based testing. Through the first 747 attempted shipboard landings, AAG suffered 10 operational mission failures, including one incident to the engine that supports the barricade. The Navy identified 7 unique IRs that caused the 10 operational mission failures for AAG. Of the seven, six fixes have been installed and will be in place to support flight operations during CVN 78’s PDT&T. The one remaining IR occurred once, is deemed low priority, and will be monitored during future flight operations. • This reliability estimate falls well below the re-baselined reliability growth curve and well below the requirement for Mean Cycles Between Operational Mission Failures, where a cycle represents the recovery of one aircraft. • The reliability concerns are magnified by the current AAG design that does not allow electrical isolation of the Power Conditioning Subsystem equipment from high power buses, limiting corrective maintenance on below-deck equipment during flight operations. Combat System • The CVN 78 SDTS events revealed good performance of the SSDS Mark 2 command decision system due to its ability to manage the combat system tracks, manage and apply the ship’s engagement doctrine, and schedule intercepts and launch missiles against incoming subsonic anti-ship cruise missile (ASCM) surrogates. • In the most recent CVN 78 SDTS developmental test event, the MFR and CEC failed to maintain detections and tracks for one of the threat surrogates in the multi-target raid; however, that raid presented a scenario that was more challenging to the combat system than originally planned. • In developmental testing on SDTS, the SLQ-32(V)6 electronic surveillance system demonstrated poor performance that prompted the Navy to delay additional operational tests until those problems could be corrected. Similar problems were previously reported in DOT&E’s September 2016 SLQ-32(V)6 SEWIP Block 2 IOT&E Report. • The Navy continues to address known deficiencies with the DBR Air Traffic Control (ATC), but the resolution of those problems will not be known until CVN 78 returns to sea. In at-sea testing before the PSA, DBR was plagued by extraneous false and close-in dual tracks adversely affecting ATC performance, and Navy analysis noted that DBR performance needs to be improved to support carrier ATC center certification. SGR • CVN 78 is unlikely to achieve its SGR requirement. The target threshold is based on unrealistic assumptions including fair weather and unlimited visibility, and that aircraft emergencies, failures of shipboard equipment, ship maneuvers, and manning shortfalls will not affect flight operations. During the 2013 operational assessment, DOT&E conducted an analysis of past aircraft carrier operations in major conflicts. The analysis concludes that the CVN 78 SGR requirement is well above historical levels. • DOT&E plans to assess CVN 78 performance during IOT&E by comparing it to the SGR requirement, as well as to the demonstrated performance of the Nimitz-class carriers. • Poor reliability of key systems that support sortie generation on CVN 78 could cause a cascading series of delays during flight operations that would affect CVN 78’s ability to generate sorties. The poor or unknown reliability of these critical subsystems represents the most risk to the successful completion of CVN 78 IOT&E. Manning • Based on current expected manning, the berthing capacity for officers and enlisted will be exceeded by approximately 100 personnel with some variability in the estimates. This Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 30 also leaves no room for extra personnel during inspections, exercises, or routine face-to-face turnovers. • Planned ship manning requires filling 100 percent of the billets. This is not the Navy’s standard practice on other ships, and the personnel and training systems may not be able to support 100 percent manning. Additionally, workload estimates for the many new technologies, such as catapults, arresting gear, radar, and weapons and aircraft elevators are not yet well understood. Electromagnetic Compatibility • Developmental testing identified significant electromagnetic radiation hazard and interference problems. The Navy continues to characterize and develop mitigation plans for the problems, but some operational limitations and restrictions are expected to persist into IOT&E and deployment. The Navy will need to develop capability assessments at differing levels of system utilization in order for commanders to make informed decisions on system employment. Live Fire Test & Evaluation • The potential vulnerability of CVN 78’s new critical systems to underwater threat-induced shock has not yet been fully characterized. The program continued shock testing on EMALS, AAG, and the AWE components during CY19 but because of a scarcity of systems, alternatives to component shock testing of DBR components are being pursued and shock testing will likely not be completed before the FSST. The Vulnerability Assessment Reports delivered to date provide an assessment of the ship’s survivability to air-delivered threat engagements. The classified findings in the report identify the specific equipment that most frequently would lead to mission capability loss. In FY20, the Navy is scheduled to deliver additional report volumes that will assess vulnerability to underwater threats and compliance with Operational Requirements Document survivability criteria. Recommendations The Navy should: 1. Continue to characterize the electromagnetic environment on board CVN 78 and develop operating procedures to maximize system effectiveness and maintain safety. As applicable, the Navy should utilize the lessons learned from CVN 78 to inform design modifications for CVN 79 and future carriers. 2. Fund all remaining SDTS events and explore the possibility of leaving the MFR on the SDTS past 2QFY20 to allow for completion of the CVN 78 self-defense test program. 3. Fund the CVN 78 lead ship combat system operational testing and the M&S required to support assessment of the CVN 78 PRA requirement. 4. Implement the required software updates to multiple combat system elements to allow cueing from external sources necessary to conduct one of the SDTS test events.54 Issues Raised in May 2019 GAO Report The May 2019 GAO report, which covers some issues previous discussed in this CRS report, stated the following: Technology Maturity, Design Stability, and Production Readiness 54 Department of Defense, Director, Operational Test & Evaluation, FY2019 Annual Report, December 20, 2019, pp. 125-126. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 31 The Navy accepted delivery of the lead ship, CVN 78, in May 2017 despite challenges related to immature technologies and struggles to demonstrate the reliability of mature systems. The Navy reports that 10 of the Ford Class’s 12 critical technologies are fully mature—the advanced arresting gear (AAG) and one of the ship’s missile systems are not yet mature. The advanced weapons elevators are among the systems deemed mature by the Navy; however, according to Navy officials, only 2 of the 11 elevators installed on the ship can bring munitions to the flight deck—a key element of operational flights. The shipbuilder is working to correct the system during its first post-delivery maintenance period, now scheduled to end in October 2019, and the Navy plans to create a land-based site to test the elevators, which will come at an additional cost. Shipboard testing is ongoing for several critical systems and could delay future operational testing. Those systems include the electromagnetic aircraft launch system (EMALS), AAG, and dual band radar (DBR). Although the Navy is testing EMALS and AAG on the ship with aircraft, the reliability of those systems remains a concern. If these systems cannot function safely, CVN 78 will not demonstrate it can rapidly deploy aircraft—a key requirement for these carriers. Recent shipboard testing revealed that the Navy is struggling to get DBR to operate as planned. Moreover, DBR poses a greater radiation hazard to personnel and systems on an aircraft carrier than the Navy anticipated, which could restrict certain types of flight operations. The remaining challenges the Navy faces in maturing CVN 78’s critical technologies could lead to their redesign or replacement on later ships. This would include CVN 79, which is currently 55 percent complete, as well as the third and fourth ships, CVNs 80 and 81. CVN 79 repeats the CVN 78 design with some modifications and replaces DBR with the Enterprise Air Surveillance Radar (EASR), which is in development. The Navy does not identify this new system as a critical technology in the Ford Class program because it derives from the pre-existing Air and Missile Defense Radar (AMDR) program. However, EASR is a different size and performs a different mission than the AMDR systems, which are designed for destroyers. Therefore, EASR may still require design and development efforts to function on the carrier. The Navy plans to procure two EASR units for CVNs 79 and 80 and install the CVN 79 unit during that ship’s second phase of delivery. CVNs 80 and 81 will repeat the design of CVN 79. Other Program Issues CVN 78’s procurement costs increased by 23 percent over its initial cost cap and as a result of continuing technical deficiencies, the Navy may still require more funding to complete this ship. The Navy increased the current $12.9 billion cost cap for CVN 78 by $120 million in May 2018 to account for additional post-delivery work, but added work and cost changes may result in an additional cost increase. Costs for CVN 79 are also likely to increase as a result of optimistic cost and labor targets, putting the ship at risk of exceeding its $11.4 billion cost cap. The CVN 79 cost estimate assumes unprecedented construction efficiency—labor hours will be 18 percent lower than CVN 78. However, our analysis shows the shipbuilder is not meeting this goal and is unlikely to improve performance enough to meet cost and labor targets. Congress raised the cost cap for CVN 80 and later ships to $12.6 billion and approved the Navy’s plans to buy two carriers—CVNs 80 and 81—at the same time, based on the shipbuilder’s estimate that this strategy will save the Navy over $2 billion. However, it is unclear whether the Navy can meet this cost cap, even with the estimated savings from a two-ship buy, because it assumes further reductions in subsystem costs, construction change orders, and labor hours. The Navy projects a further reduction in labor hours compared to CVN 79—about 25 percent fewer labor hours than CVN 78—will contribute to cost savings for these ships. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 32 The program office indicated that it does not separately track or report information on software development to integrate the various subsystems of the ship. These subsystems include CVN 78’s combat control systems, which rely on integrating systems through software intensive development. Program Office Comments We provided a draft of this assessment to the program office for review and comment. The program office provided technical comments, which we incorporated where appropriate. The program office stated that, in July 2018, CVN 78 entered a year-long maintenance period. It also said that, as of February 2019, two advanced weapons elevators are operating, and it continues to improve developmental system reliability. The program also stated that, with CVN 79 construction 55 percent complete, shipbuilder cost performance remains stable, but slightly below the level needed to achieve production labor hour reduction targets. The program stated that the shipbuilder continues to work through the effects of material shortfalls that disrupted performance. The program said that the Navy plans to deliver a complete, deployable ship as scheduled and within the cost cap to maintain an 11-carrier fleet. The program office also stated that the Navy awarded the CVN 80/81 procurement contract in January 2019 and expects to save $4 billion, compared to if it had purchased each ship individually. According to the program, the contract limits the Navy’s liability and incentivizes the shipyard’s best performance.55 Design of Aircraft Carrier to Be Procured after CVN-81 Overview Another oversight issue for Congress is whether the aircraft carrier to be procured after CVN-81 should be a Ford-class carrier (i.e., a CVN) or a smaller and perhaps nonnuclear-powered aircraft carrier. The Navy’s FY2020 30-year shipbuilding plan calls for procuring the next carrier in FY2028, and for that carrier to be a CVN. The question of whether the Navy should shift at some point from procuring CVNs like the CVN-78 class to procuring smaller and perhaps nonnuclear-powered aircraft carriers has been a recurrent matter of discussion and Navy study over the years, and is currently an active discussion in the Navy. Advocates of smaller carriers traditionally have argued that they are individually less expensive to procure, that the Navy might be able to employ competition between shipyards in their procurement (something that the Navy cannot do with large-deck, nuclear-powered carriers like the CVN-78 class, because only one U.S. shipyard, HII/NNS, can build aircraft carriers of that size), and that today’s aircraft carriers concentrate much of the Navy’s striking power into a relatively small number of expensive platforms that adversaries could focus on attacking in time of war. Supporters of CVNs traditionally have argued that smaller carriers, though individually less expensive to procure, are less cost-effective in terms of dollars spent per aircraft embarked or aircraft sorties that can be generated, that it might be possible to use competition in procuring certain materials and components for large-deck, nuclear-powered aircraft carriers, and that smaller carriers, though perhaps affordable in larger numbers, would be individually less survivable in time of war than CVNs. 55 Government Accountability Office, Weapon Systems Annual Assessment[:] Limited Use of Knowledge-Based Practices Continues to Undercut DOD’s Investments, GAO-19-336SP, May 2019, p. 104. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 33 Section 128(d) of the FY2016 National Defense Authorization Act (S. 1356/P.L. 114-92 of November 25, 2015) required the Navy to submit a report on potential requirements, capabilities, and alternatives for the future development of aircraft carriers that would replace or supplement the CVN–78 class aircraft carrier. The report, which was conducted for the Navy by the RAND Corporation, was delivered to the congressional defense committees in classified form in July 2016. An unclassified version of the report was then prepared and issued in 2017 as a publicly released RAND report.56 The question of whether to shift to smaller aircraft carriers was also addressed in three studies on future fleet architecture that were required by Section 1067 of the FY2016 National Defense Authorization Act (S. 1356/P.L. 114-92 of November 25, 2015). Current Discussion Statements from Navy officials reported in the press beginning in February 2019 suggested that the Navy is currently considering moving to a new aircraft carrier/naval aviation force architecture that might supplement today’s CVNs with smaller and perhaps nonnuclear-powered aircraft carriers.57 According to these press reports, one option for a smaller carrier is the so-called Lighting Carrier, a term referring to an LHA-type amphibious assault ship equipped with an air wing consisting largely of F-35B Joint Strike Fighter (JSFs). (The alternate name for the F-35 is the Lighting II. The B variant of the F-35, which is currently being procured for the Marine Corps, is short takeoff, vertical landing [STOVL] variant that can be operated off of ships with flight decks that are shorter than the flight decks of CVNs.) The Navy and Marine Corps have conducted experiments with the Lightning Carrier concept.58 Another option for a smaller carrier is one whose air wing would consist mostly or entirely of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). The Navy in recent years has periodically studied the potential of UAV carriers. The current discussion both inside and outside the Navy over the aircraft carrier to be procured after CVN-81 appears to reflect several considerations, including the following:  concerns over China’s improving capabilities for detecting surface ships and attacking them with anti-ship ballistic missiles (ASBMs) and advanced anti-ship cruise missiles (ASCMs);  the procurement and operating and support (O&S) costs of CVNs and their air wings, particularly in a context of constraints on Navy funding and funding demands from other competing Navy programs; and  the potential capabilities of smaller carriers operating air wings consisting of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and/or F-35B Joint Strike Fighters (i.e., the short-takeoff, vertical landing [STOVL] version of the F-35 now being procured for the Marine Corps). 56 Bradley Martin and Michael McMahon, Future Aircraft Carrier Options, Santa Monica, CA, RAND Corporation, 2017, 87 pp. 57 See Rich Abott, “Navy Starts Looking At Carriers After CVN-81,” Defense Daily, February 15, 2019; Richard R. Burges, “Secretary: Navy Discussing Next-Gen Carrier Concepts, Including ‘Lightning Carrier,’” Seapower, October 24, 2019; Wesley Morgan, “Navy Secretary Accuses Congressional Critics of ‘Disinformation’ on Ford Carrier,” Politico Pro, October 23, 2019; Otto Kreisher, “Spencer Lauds Tight Integration of Navy, Marine Forces in ‘Great Power Competition,’” Seapower, October 27, 2019; Sam LaGrone, “Navy Still Mulling Post-F-35C Aviation Combatant; Could be Mix of Manned, Unmanned Aircraft,” USNI News, December 5, 2019; Gina Hawkins, “Acting SecNav Hints at Fewer Aircraft Carriers in Next Ship-Count Plan,” Military.com, January 29, 2020; Sam LaGrone, “Future of U.S. Carrier Fleet Key Issue as New Force Structure Moves Through Pentagon,” USNI News, January 29, 2020; Rich Abott, “Modly: Future Carrier Force Unclear, All Options On The Table,” Defense Daily, January 30, 2020. 58 See, for example, Megan Eckstein, “Marines Test ‘Lightning Carrier’ Concept, Control 13 F-35Bs from Multiple Amphibs,” USNI News, October 23, 2019. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 34 Future Carrier 2030 Task Force Announced on March 9 A March 9, 2020, Navy news release stated: Acting Secretary of the Navy Thomas B. Modly announced today he is commissioning a Blue-Ribbon Future Carrier 2030 (FC-2030) Task Force to conduct a six-month study to reimagine the future of the aircraft carrier and carrier-based naval aviation (manned and unmanned) for 2030 and beyond. FC-2030 will be complementary to, and informed by a broad review of national shipbuilding requirements being conducted by Deputy Secretary of Defense David L. Norquist. Navy and Marine Corps uniformed and civilian leadership will be engaged in both efforts. FC-2030 will attract current and former leaders from Congress, leaders from the U.S. shipbuilding and supporting technology industries, current and former Department of Defense leaders, as well as thought leaders at War Colleges, think-tanks, and futurists from around the nation. “The long-term challenges facing our nation and the world demand clear-eyed assessments and hard choices,” said Modly. “Because we have four new Ford carriers under contract, we have some time to reimagine what comes next. Any assessment we do must consider cost, survivability, and the critical national requirement to sustain an industrial base that can produce the ships we need—ships that will contribute to a superior, integrated naval force for the 2030s and far beyond. “Aircraft carrier construction sustains nearly 60,000 skilled jobs in over 46 states,” Modly added. “It can’t be simply turned on and off like a faucet. We must be thoughtful in how we approach changes as they will have lasting impacts on our national industrial competitiveness and employment.” The task force will be led by an Executive Director chosen from within the Department of the Navy’s Secretariat staff, and assisted on a collateral-duty basis by representatives from the Office of Naval Research and the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Warfighting Development. Along with an executive director, the FC-2030 Senior Executive Panel will consist of thought leaders with historical records of leading and contributing to large change in maritime defense strategies and programs. Former Senator John Warner of Virginia has agreed to serve as the Honorary Chairman of the Executive Panel. Former Secretary of the Navy John Lehman, former acting Deputy Secretary of Defense Christine Fox, former Deputy Undersecretary of the Navy Seth Cropsey, and former Congressman Randy Forbes have agreed to serve as Executive members of the panel. “Our future strength will be determined as much by the gray matter we apply to our challenges as the gray hulls we build,” said Modly. “We need the best minds from both inside and outside of government focused on this issue.” The study will be conducted with the assistance of the Naval University System (U.S. Naval Academy, Naval War College, Marine Corps University, and Naval Postgraduate School) as well as eligible Federally Funded Research and Development Centers (FFRDCs) and Naval Warfare Centers. The goal at the end of the study is to provide a report to the secretary of the Navy detailing a vision of the competitive global security environment and the role of carrier-based naval aviation in that future context. Considerations will include expected principles of deterrence, global presence missions, protection of American economic security, as well as potential combat with possible adversaries. The study will also define likely constraints of means in terms of future defense budgets, as well as avenue to contemplate future possible technologies not yet invented that could change the stakes of carrier-based naval aviation in all phases of global competition. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 35 Finally, the report will provide options for the Department of the Navy in requirements for different various future aircraft (manned and unmanned, nuclear and/or conventional) carriers, to be used in future months and years in developing guidance to industry. The study will also examine how best to utilize and evolve the existing carrier fleet, including the more flexible and adaptable Ford Class, to meet the challenges of advanced long-range weapons that will extend and expand contested areas in the future.59 Shock Trial An earlier oversight issue for Congress for the CVN-78 program was whether to conduct the shock trial for the CVN-78 class in the near term, on the lead ship in the class, or years later, on the second ship in the class. For background information on that issue, see Appendix B. Legislative Activity for FY2021 Summary of Congressional Action on FY2021 Funding Request Table 3 summarizes congressional action on the FY2021 procurement funding request for the CVN-78 program. Table 3. Congressional Action on FY2021 Procurement Funding Request Millions of dollars, rounded to nearest tenth. Request Authorization Appropriation HASC SASC Conf. HAC SAC Conf. CVN-78 71.0 CVN-79 0 CVN-80 997.5 CVN-81 1,645.6 Total above 2,714.1 Source: Table prepared by CRS based on Navy’s FY2021 budget submission, committee and conference reports, and explanatory statements on FY2021 National Defense Authorization Act and FY2020 DOD Appropriations Act. Notes: HASC is House Armed Services Committee; SASC is Senate Armed Services Committee; HAC is House Appropriations Committee; SAC is Senate Appropriations Committee; Conf. is conference agreement. 59 Secretary of the Navy Public Affairs, “Acting SECNAV to Commission Future Carrier 2030 Task Force,” Navy News Service, March 9, 2030. See also Paul McCleary, “Beyond The Ford: Navy Studies Next-Gen Carriers EXCLUSIVE,” Breaking Defense, March 5, 2020.; Megan Eckstein, “Navy Kicks Off Study of Next-Generation Carriers, Naval Aviation,” USNI News, March 9, 2020; Mallory Shelbourne, “Modly launches 2030 Carrier Task Force,” Inside Defense, March 10, 2030; Megan Eckstein, “Modly: Parallel Fleet Studies Could Reshape Future of Aircraft Carriers,” USNI News, March 12, 2030. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 36 Appendix A. Background Information on Two-Ship Block Buy for CVN-80 and CVN-81 This appendix presents additional background information on the two-ship block buy contract for CVN-80 and CVN-81. The option for procuring two CVN-78 class carriers under a two-ship block buy contract had been discussed in this CRS report since April 2012.60 In earlier years, the discussion focused on the option of using a block buy contract for procuring CVN-79 and CVN-80. In more recent years, interest among policymakers focused on the option of using a block buy contract for procuring CVN-80 and CVN-81. On March 19, 2018, the Navy released a request for proposal (RFP) to Huntington Ingalls Industries/Newport News Shipbuilding (HII/NNS) regarding a two-ship buy of some kind for CVN-80 and CVN-81. A March 20, 2018, Navy News Service report stated the following: The Navy released a CVN 80/81 two-ship buy Request for Proposal (RFP) to Huntington Ingalls Industries—Newport News Shipbuilding (HII-NNS) March 19 to further define the cost savings achievable with a two-ship buy. With lethality and affordability a top priority, the Navy has been working with HII-NNS over the last several months to estimate the total savings associated with procuring CVN 80 and CVN 81 as a two-ship buy. “In keeping with the National Defense Strategy, the Navy developed an acquisition strategy to combine the CVN 80 and CVN 81 procurements to better achieve the Department’s objectives of building a more lethal force with greater performance and affordability,” said James F. Geurts, Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Research Development and Acquisition. “This opportunity for a two-ship contract is dependent on significant savings that the shipbuilding industry and government must demonstrate. The Navy is requesting a proposal from HII-NNS in order to evaluate whether we can achieve significant savings.” The two-ship buy is a contracting strategy the Navy has effectively used in the 1980s to procure Nimitz-class aircraft carriers and achieved significant acquisition cost savings compared to contracting for the ships individually. While the CVN 80/81 two-ship buy negotiations transpire, the Navy is pursuing contracting actions necessary to continue CVN 80 fabrication in fiscal year (FY) 2018 and preserve the current schedule. The Navy plans to award the CVN 80 construction contract in early FY 2019 as a two-ship buy pending Congressional approval and achieving significant savings.61 Section 121(a)(2) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (H.R. 5515/P.L. 115-232 of August 13, 2018) permitted the Navy, after the Department of Defense (DOD) made certain certifications to Congress, to add CVN-81 to the existing contract for building CVN-80. DOD provided the required certification on December 31, 2018. On 60 See the section entitled “Potential Two-Ship Block Buy on CVN-79 and CVN-80” in the April 4, 2012, version of CRS Report RS20643, Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. In more recent years, this section was modified to discuss the option in connection with CVN-80 and CVN-81. 61 Naval Sea Systems Command Public Affairs, “Navy Seeks Savings, Releases Two-Carrier RFP,” Navy News, March 20, 2018. See also Megan Eckstein, “UPDATED: Navy, Newport News Taking Steps Towards Two-Carrier Buy,” USNI News, March 19, 2018. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 37 January 31, 2019, the Navy announced that it had awarded a two-ship fixed-price incentive (firm target) (FPIF) contract for CVN-80 and CVN-81 to HII/NNS.62 The two-ship contract for CVN-80 and CVN-81 can be viewed as a block buy contract because the two ships are being procured in different fiscal years (CVN-80 was procured in FY2018 and CVN-81 is shown in the Navy’s FY2020 budget submission as a ship procured in FY2020).63 The Navy’s previous two-ship aircraft carrier procurements occurred in FY1983 (for CVN-72 and CVN-73) and FY1988 (for CVN-74 and CVN-75). In each of those two earlier cases, however, the two ships were fully funded within a single fiscal year, making each of these cases a simple two-ship purchase (akin, for example, to procuring two Virginia-class attack submarines or two DDG-51 class destroyers in a given fiscal year) rather than a two-ship block buy (i.e., a contract spanning the procurement of end items procured across more than one fiscal year). Compared to DOD’s estimate that the two-ship block buy contract for CVN-80 and CVN-81 would produce savings of $3.9 billion (as measured from estimated costs for the two ships in the December 2017 Navy business case analysis), DOD states that “the Department of Defense’s Office of Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation (CAPE) developed an Independent Estimate of Savings for the two-ship procurement and forecast savings of $3.1 billion ([in] Then-Year [dollars]), or approximately 11 percent.... The primary differences between [the] CAPE and Navy estimates of savings are in Government Furnished Equipment64 and production change orders.”65 Within the total estimated combined reduction in cost, HII/NNS reportedly expects to save up to $1.6 billion in contractor-furnished equipment.66 A November 2018 DOD report to Congress that was submitted as an attachment to DOD’s December 31, 2018, certification stated the following regarding the sources of cost reduction for the two-ship contract: The CVN 80 and CVN 81 two-ship buy expands and improves upon the affordability initiatives identified in the Annual Report on Cost Reduction Efforts for JOHN F. KENNEDY (CVN 79) and ENTERPRISE (CVN 80) as required by section 126(c) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017 (P.L. 114-328). Production saving initiatives for single-ship buys included use of unit families in construction, pre-outfitting and complex assemblies which move work to a more efficient workspace environment, reduction in the number of superlifts,67 and facility investments which improve the shipbuilder trade effectiveness. A two-ship buy assumes four years between 62 See Office of the Navy Chief of Information, “Navy Awards Contract for Construction of Two Carriers,” Navy News Service, January 31, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “UPDATED: Navy Awards 2-Carrier Contract to Newport News Shipbuilding,” USNI News, January 31, 2019; Marcus Weisgerber, “US Navy Places First 2-Carrier Order in Three Decades,” Defense One, January 31, 2019; David B. Larter, “US Navy Signs Mammoth Contract with Huntington Ingalls for Two Aircraft Carriers,” Defense News, January 31, 2019; Rich Abott, “Navy Awards HII $15 Billion In Two Carrier Buy,” Defense Daily, February 1, 2019. 63 For more on block buy contracting, see CRS Report R41909, Multiyear Procurement (MYP) and Block Buy Contracting in Defense Acquisition: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 64 Government-furnished equipment (GFE) is equipment that the government purchases from supplier firms and then provides to the shipbuilder for incorporation into the ships. 65 Department of Defense, FORD Class Aircraft Carrier Certification, CVN 80 and CVN 81 Two Ship Procurement Authority, as Required by Section 121(b) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (P.L. 115-232), November 2018, pp. 8-9. 66 Rich Abott, “Navy Awards HII $15 Billion In Two Carrier Buy,” Defense Daily, February 1, 2019. Contractor-furnished equipment (CFE) is equipment that the contractor (in this case, HII/NNS) purchases from supplier firms for incorporation into the ships. 67 A superlift is the use of a crane to move a very large section of the ship from the land into its final position on the ship. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 38 ship deliveries which allows more schedule overlap, and therefore more shop-level and assembly-level production efficiencies than two single-ship buys. Procuring two ships to a single technical baseline reduces the requirement for engineering labor hours when compared to single-ship estimates. The ability to rollover production support engineering and planning products maximizes savings while recognizing the minimum amount of engineering labor necessary to address obsolescence and regulatory changes on CVN 81. The two-ship agreement with the shipbuilder achieves a 55 percent reduction in construction support engineering hours on CVN 81 and greater than 18 percent reduction in production support and planning hours compared to single ship procurements. The two-ship procurement strategy allows for serial production opportunities that promote tangible learning and reduced shop and machine set-up times. It allows for efficient use of production facilities, re-use of production jigs and fixtures, and level loading of key trades. The continuity of work allows for reductions in supervision, services and support costs. The result of these efficiencies is a production man-hours step down that is equivalent to an 82 percent learning curve since CVN 79. Key to achieving these production efficiencies is Integrated Digital Shipbuilding (iDS). The Navy’s Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation (RDT&E) and the shipbuilder’s investment in iDS, totaling $631 million, will reduce the amount of production effort required to build FORD Class carriers. The two-ship buy will accelerate the benefits of this approach. The ability to immediately use the capability on CVN 81 would lead to a further reduction in touch labor and services in affected value streams. The two-ship agreement with the shipbuilder represents a production man-hours reduction of over seven percent based on iDS efficiencies. Contractual authority for two ships allows the shipbuilder to maximize economic order quantity material procurement. This allows more efficient ordering and scheduling of material deliveries and will promote efficiencies through earlier ordering, single negotiations, vendor quotes, and cross program purchase orders. These efficiencies are expected to reduce material costs by about six percent more when compared to single-ship estimates. Improved material management and flexibility will prevent costly production delays. Furthermore, this provides stability within the nuclear industrial base, de-risking the COLUMBIA and VIRGINIA Class programs. The two-ship buy would provide economic stability to approximately 130,000 workers across 46 States within the industrial base. Change order requirements are likewise reduced as Government Furnished Equipment (GFE) providers will employ planning and procurement strategies based on the common technical baseline that minimize configuration changes that must be incorporated on the follow ship. Change order budget allocations have been reduced over 25 percent based on two-ship strategies. In addition to the discrete savings achieved with the shipbuilder, the two-ship procurement authority provides our partner GFE providers a similar opportunity to negotiate economic order quantity savings and achieve cross program savings when compared to single-ship estimates.68 An April 16, 2018, press report stated the following: If the Navy decides to buy aircraft carriers CVN-80 and 81 together, Newport News Shipbuilding will be able to maintain a steady workload that supports between 23,000 and 25,000 workers at the Virginia yard for the next decade or so, the shipyard president told reporters last week. 68 Department of Defense, FORD Class Aircraft Carrier Certification, CVN 80 and CVN 81 Two Ship Procurement Authority, as Required by Section 121(b) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (P.L. 115-232), November 2018, pp. 6-7. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 39 Part of the appeal of buying the two carriers together is that the Navy would also buy them a bit closer together: the ships would be centered about three-and-a-half or four years apart, instead of the five-year centers for recent carrier acquisition, Newport News Shipbuilding President Jennifer Boykin told reporters. Boykin said the closer ship construction centers would allow her to avoid a “labor valley” where the workforce levels would dip down after one ship and then have to come back up, which is disruptive for employees and costly for the company. If this two-carrier buy goes through, the company would avoid the labor valley altogether and ensure stability in its workforce, Boykin said in a company media briefing at the Navy League’s Sea Air Space 2018 symposium. That workforce stability contributes to an expected $1.6 billion in savings on the two-carrier buy from Newport News Shipbuilding’s portion of the work alone, not including government-furnished equipment.... Boykin said four main things contribute to the expected $1.6 billion in savings from the two-carrier buy. First, “if you don’t have the workforce valley, there’s a labor efficiency that represents savings.” Second, “if you buy two at once, my engineering team doesn’t have to produce two technical baselines, two sets of technical products; they only have to produce one, and the applicability is to both, so there’s savings there. When we come through the planning, the build plan of how we plan to build the ship, the planning organization only has to put out one plan and the applicability is to both, so there’s savings there.” The third savings is a value of money over time issue, she said, and fourth is economic order quantity savings throughout the entire supply chain.69 Discussions of the option of using a block buy contract for procuring carriers have focused on using it to procure two carriers in part because carriers have been procured on five-year centers, meaning that two carriers could be included in a block-buy contract spanning six years—the same number of years originally planned for the two block buy contracts that were used to procure mnay of the Navy’s Littoral Combat Ships.70 It can be noted, however, that there is no statutory limit on the number of years that a block buy contract can cover, and that the LCS block buy contracts were subsequently amended to cover LCSs procured in a seventh year. This, and the possibility of procuring carriers on 3- or 3.5-year centers, raises the possibility of using a block buy contract to procure three aircraft carriers: For example, if procurement of aircraft carriers were shifted to 3- or 3.5-year centers, a block buy contract for procuring CVN-80, CVN-81, and CVN-82 could span seven years (with the first ship procured in FY2018, and the third ship procured in FY2024) or eight years (with the first ship procured in FY2018 and the third ship procured in FY2025). The percentage cost reduction possible under a three-ship block buy contract could be greater than that possible under a two-ship block buy contract, but the offsetting issue of reducing congressional flexibility for changing aircraft carrier procurement plans in coming years in response to changing strategic or budgetary circumstances could also be greater. 69 Megan Eckstein, “Newport News Would Save $1.6 Billion, Maintain Stable Workforce of 25,000 Under 2 Proposed Carrier Buy,” USNI News, April 16, 2018. See also Rich Abott, “HII Sees Two Carrier Buy Saving $1.6 Billion Before GFE,” Defense Daily, April 11, 2018: 10-11. 70 For more on the LCS block buy contracts, see CRS Report RL33741, Navy Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 40 Appendix B. Shock Trial An earlier oversight issue for Congress for the CVN-78 program was whether to conduct the shock trial for the CVN-78 class in the near term, on the lead ship in the class, or years later, on the second ship in the class. This appendix presents background information on that issue. A shock trial, known formally as a full ship shock trial (FSST) and sometimes called a shock test, is a test of the combat survivability of the design of a new class of ships. A shock trial involves setting off one or more controlled underwater charges near the ship being tested, and then measuring the ship’s response to the underwater shock caused by the explosions. The test is intended to verify the ability of the ship’s structure and internal systems to withstand shocks caused by enemy weapons, and to reveal any changes that need to be made to the design of the ship’s structure or its internal systems to meet the ship’s intended survivability standard. Shock trials are nominally to be performed on the lead ship in a new class of ships, but there have also been cases where the shock trial for a new class was done on one of the subsequent ships in the class. The question of whether to conduct the shock trial for the CVN-78 class in the near term, on the lead ship in the class, or years later, on the second ship in the class, has been a matter of disagreement at times between the Navy and the office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD). The Navy has wanted to perform the shock trial on the second ship in the class, because performing it on the lead ship in the class, the Navy has argued, will cause a significant delay in the first deployment of the lead ship, effectively delaying the return of the carrier force to an 11-ship force level and increasing the operational strain on the other 10 carriers. The Navy has argued that the risks of delaying the shock trial on the CVN-78 to the second ship in the class are acceptable, because the CVN-78 class hull design is based on the Nimitz (CVN-68) class aircraft carrier hull design, whose survivability against shocks is understood, because systems incorporated into the CVN-78 design have been shock tested at the individual component level, and because computer modeling can simulate how the CVN-78 design as a whole will respond to shocks. OSD has argued that the risks of delaying the CVN-78 class shock trial to the second ship in the class are not acceptable, because the CVN-78 design is the first new U.S. aircraft carrier design in four decades; because the CVN-78 design has many internal design differences compared to the CVN-68 design, including new systems not present in the CVN-68 class design; and because computer modeling can only do so much to confirm how a complex new platform, such as an aircraft carrier and all its internal systems, will respond to shocks. The risk of delaying the shock trial, OSD has argued, outweighs the desire to avoid a delay in the first deployment of the lead ship in the class. OSD in 2015 directed the Navy to plan for conducting a shock trial on the lead ship. The Navy complied with this direction but has also sought to revisit the issue with OSD. The issue of the shock trial for the CVN-78 class has been a matter of legislative activity—see, for example, Section 121(b) of the FY2018 National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 2810/P.L. 115-91 of December 12, 2017). An April 5, 2018, press report states the following: The Pentagon’s No. 2 civilian has said the Navy should perform shock-testing soon to determine how well its new $12.9 billion aircraft carrier—the costliest warship ever—could withstand an attack, affirming the service’s recent decision to back down from a plan for delay. “We agree with your view that a test in normal sequence is more prudent and pragmatic,” Deputy Defense Secretary Patrick Shanahan said in a newly released March 26 letter to Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman John McCain. The Arizona Republican and Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service RS20643 · VERSION 227 · UPDATED 41 Senator Jack Reed, the panel’s top Democrat, pressed for the shock-testing to go ahead as originally planned. James Guerts, the Navy’s chiefs weapons buyer, told reporters last month that the Navy was acquiescing to the testing after initially asking Defense Secretary James Mattis to delay it for at least six years. In its push to maintain an 11-carrier fleet, the Navy wanted to wait and perform the test on a second carrier in the class rather than on the USS Gerald Ford.71 Author Information Ronald O'Rourke Specialist in Naval Affairs Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 71 Anthony Capaccio, “Pentagon Endorses Shock-Testing Carrier After Navy Backs Down,” Bloomberg, April 5, 2018. See also Craig Hooper, “The Navy Obfuscates On Shock Testing The $13 Billion USS Ford,” Forbes, October 23, 2019; Jason Sherman and Lee Hudson, “Navy to Conduct Full Ship Shock Trials of CVN-78 in ’19 or ’20,” Inside the Navy, March 26, 2018; Anthony Capaccio, “Navy Presses Mattis to Delay ‘Shock Testing’ Costliest Carrier,” Bloomberg, February 7, 2018; Jason Sherman, “Lawmakers Rraise Ford-Class Carrier Cost Cap, Grant Navy Wiggle Room to Avoid Shock Testing,” Inside the Navy, November 13, 2017. 		2020-05-07T16:40:48-0400
COVID-19: National Security and Defense Strategy https://crsreports.congress.gov April 30, 2020COVID-19: National Security and Defense StrategyThe outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic has prompted questions about U.S. national security and crisis preparedness. Inherent to those discussions are broader, foundational questions about how the United States government conceptualizes national security, and the currently held view by many of the relative prioritization of the Department of Defense (DOD) over other instruments of national power. What Is “Security”? While definitional debates often seem frustratingly obscure, their outcomes often have a significant bearing on the programs, priorities, and activities of the United States Government. In other words, how a problem is framed matters because those definitions directly affect how the government operates, including how it translates those concepts into the priorities that require primary attention and resources. Scholars and practitioners have long debated what, exactly, constitutes a “security” challenge, and what the role of the state should be in their management. The tension between traditional “realist” security and “human” security perspectives provides one example of how these debates can play out. Traditional analyses contended that security is synonymous with the mitigation of military risk and the effective deterrence—or prosecution—of warfare between states. In the 1990s, responding in part to genocides in Africa and the Balkans, as well as humanitarian and financial crises, some analysts widened the aperture for security studies. “Human security,” a concept of security that uses the individual as its referent point and focuses on the overall well-being of people within society, became another way that scholars and practitioners began evaluating security. Over time, issues such as access to health, impacts of climate change, food and energy security, and even to some extent counterinsurgency have become associated with the concept of human security. A key question for policymakers has been to what extent, if any, concepts and issues that have become associated with human security should be integrated into national security planning that is still to a significant degree based on updated versions of traditional security concepts. On one hand, some observers contend that “human security” is too broad to be useful for policy planning; if everything is a security priority, nothing is a security priority. Other practitioners, building on that point, argue that the expansive “human security” definition obscures the formidable defense challenges that adversaries around the globe pose through their military modernization investments. One example: analysts express concern that adversaries including Russia and China, and to a lesser extent Iran and North Korea, have invested in “anti-access/area denial” capabilities designed to limit U.S. freedom of action and therefore constrain America’s ability to advance its interests around the globe. U.S. adversaries such as Russia and China are also modernizing their nuclear capabilities. According to this more “traditional” view, diluting the concept of security in defense planning risks the United States being unprepared for a major conflict, should it arise. Other observers respond that some “human security” approaches better reflect extant realities. As their logic goes, over the past 25 years, “non-traditional” security challenges such as the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, stability operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, and pandemics including the 2016 Ebola outbreak and now COVID-19 have all commanded more U.S. attention and resources than conventional warfare with another nation-state. They argue that choosing to define security narrowly is choosing to ignore the challenges with which the U.S. government—and U.S. military—have had to contend, and are likely to have to do so in the future. Differing U.S. Government Definitions of Security The Obama Administration arguably used a more expansive definition of security in its strategy documents. Its 2010 National Security Strategy argued that key threats to the United States have evolved: Wars over ideology have given way to wars over religious, ethnic, and tribal identity; nuclear dangers have proliferated; inequality and economic instability have intensified; damage to our environment, food insecurity, and dangers to public health are increasingly shared; and the same tools that empower individuals to build enable them to destroy. The Trump Administration, by contrast, chose to focus the national security agenda on strategic competition, primarily with key adversarial states: China and Russia challenge American power, influence, and interests, attempting to erode American security and prosperity. They are determined to make economies less free and less fair, to grow their militaries, and to control information and data to repress their societies and expand their influence. At the same time, the dictatorships of the democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the Islamic Republic of Iran are determined to destabilize regions, threaten Americans and our allies, and brutalize their own people. Transnational threat groups, from jihadist terrorists to transnational criminal organizations, are actively trying to harm Americans. Preventing China and Russian from developing military capabilities superior to those of the U.S. and creating COVID-19: National Security and Defense Strategy https://crsreports.congress.gov “peace through [military] strength” is viewed as a key way by which the U.S. can advance its interests in this competition. The Department of Defense, through the 2018 National Defense Strategy, interpreted the Trump Administration’s guidance to mean that the U.S. military ought to prioritize improving the “lethality” of its forces. The Military vs. Civilian Resource Gap Why is the United States government seemingly unable to manage both adversary aggression and contend with issues usually associated with human security? One answer to this question relates to a long-standing issue that has created a dilemma for national security institutions for the better part of two decades: the military versus civilian resources mismatch. In theory, the Department of Defense is but one element of national power that can be utilized to respond to crises or contingencies; the State Department, the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), the U.S. Trade Representative, and other agencies all provide critical capabilities to the broader national security toolkit. During the Cold War, these nonmilitary instruments were vitally important to prosecuting—and countering—political warfare strategies against the Soviet Union. Today, although DOD is generally viewed to be the instrument that fights and wins the nation’s wars, in practice, the U.S. military has taken on missions beyond that narrow warfighting scope largely due to the fact that DOD has been provided with the lion’s share of national security resources. Reflecting on the resourcing levels of State and USAID in particular, senior national security officials have long argued that this authorities-versus-resources imbalance is damaging the United States’ ability to grapple with a variety of national security challenges. For example, in November 2007, then-Secretary of Defense Robert Gates argued during a lecture at Kansas State University: One of the most important lessons of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan is that military success is not sufficient to win: economic development, institution-building and the rule of law, promoting internal reconciliation, good governance, providing basic services to the people, training and equipping indigenous military and police forces, strategic communications, and more—these, along with security, are essential ingredients for long-term success. Gates went on to argue that State Department and USAID personnel and budget cuts during the 1990s contributed to a shortfall of civilian expertise in Iraq and Afghanistan. As a result, nonmilitary tasks (such as building schools or managing city councils) often fell to U.S. service members, who usually did not have the requisite training to do so. The current COVID-19 pandemic highlights the importance of strong agencies for managing and mitigating “nontraditional” threats to U.S. security (some examples of other challenges include narcotics trafficking, crime, and climate change) as they manifest themselves both domestically and globally. Given the long-standing civilian versus military resources gap, some observers question whether those agencies that must deal with such challenges are adequately resourced relative to the current and future needs, and whether they are sufficiently integrated into national security plans and operations. “National Security” Resources Today Discerning this resource imbalance can be challenging because, in terms of the budget, the federal government does not categorize spending by national security. However, the Budget Control Act of 2011 (P.L. 112-25) initially specified separate “security” and “nonsecurity” categories for discretionary spending limits in FY2012 and FY2013. The security category was broad in scope and included budget authority for DOD, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), the National Nuclear Security Administration, the Intelligence Community Management account, and the international affairs budget function (identified by the numerical notation 150). For illustrative purposes, CRS applied this definition of “security” to FY2020 discretionary budget authority estimated in the FY2021 President’s budget request to show that such spending for agencies and departments other than DOD would collectively account for approximately one-third of the DOD allocation (see Figure 1). Figure 1. Discretionary Budget Authority, by Security and Nonsecurity Categories, FY2020 (in billions of dollars) Source: CRS analysis of Office of Management and Budget, Public Budget Database, Budget Authority XLSX; and OMB Final Sequestration Report to the President and Congress for Fiscal Year 2012, p. 3. Notes: Analysis by Brendan W. McGarry, Analyst in U.S. Defense Budget, and Christopher T. Mann, Analyst in Defense Policy and Trade. Issues for Congress In light of the threat posed by pandemics, U.S. leaders, including those in Congress, may once again need to revisit their definition of “security.” Congress, in turn, may wish to explore  whether it agrees with emerging concepts of national security, and whether an adequate balance is struck between “human” and “traditional” security priorities or whether those concepts can be effectively merged into a fundamentally new way to think about security; and  whether other instruments of national power are adequately resourced relative to current and emerging challenges. Kathleen J. McInnis, Specialist in International Security COVID-19: National Security and Defense Strategy https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF11525 · VERSION 1 · NEW IF11525 Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. https://crsreports.congress.gov/		2020-04-30T15:07:12-0400
U.S.-Proposed Missile Technology Control Regime Changes https://crsreports.congress.gov Updated May 7, 2020U.S.-Proposed Missile Technology Control Regime ChangesIntroduction In March 2018, the United States submitted a proposal to the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) partners that would relax the regime’s export guidelines for certain Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS). Advocates of altering the guidelines to ease such exports argue that increasing competition from foreign UAS manufacturers is undermining the competitive advantage of their U.S. counterparts. Other observers have emphasized the need to maintain the MTCR’s standards, which are widely regarded as effective. For more information on the MTCR, see CRS Report RL33865, Arms Control and Nonproliferation: A Catalog of Treaties and Agreements. Congress has frequently expressed interest in issues concerning UAS development and use, as well as missile proliferation, and also conducts oversight of U.S. UAS exports. The MTCR, according to its website, “seeks to limit the risks of proliferation of” nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons (NBC weapons) “by controlling exports of goods and technologies that could make a contribution to delivery systems (other than manned aircraft) for such weapons.” Established in 1987 by the United States and six other countries, the MTCR, which holds several meetings per year and currently consists of 35 partner countries, is an informal voluntary arrangement whose partners agree to apply common export policy guidelines to an annex containing two categories of controlled items. Partner countries implement these guidelines pursuant to national legislation and regularly exchange information on relevant export licensing issues, including denials of technology transfers. The MTCR guidelines apply to both armed and unarmed UAS. According to the MTCR, Category I items are the most sensitive and include complete UAS “capable of delivering a payload of at least 500 kg to a range of at least 300 km, their major complete subsystems … and related software and technology,” as well as “specially designed” production facilities for these UAS and subsystems. Partner governments should have “a strong presumption to deny” such transfers, regardless of their purpose, but may transfer such items on “rare occasions.” The guidelines prohibit exports of production facilities for Category I items. Regime partners have greater flexibility with respect to authorizing exports of Category II items, which include less sensitive and dual-use missile related components. This category also includes complete UAS, regardless of payload, capable of ranges of at least 300 km, as well as other UAS with certain characteristics. Details The proposal that the United States submitted during the March 2018 MTCR Technical Experts Meeting would provide Category II treatment for a certain subset of UAS with a “maximum speed value,” as well as associated parts and components, a Department of State official told CRS on December 4. The official did not specify the proposed speed value. The proposal also included a method for determining the speed of such a UAS, a feature not contained in the current MTCR annex, and a definition of “cruise missile.” The proposed changes would not apply to cruise missiles or affect current MTCR treatment of either complete production facilities or technology for the development and production of complete systems. The proposed changes, which have not gained the MTCR partners’ required consensus approval, are a part of a broader Trump Administration UAS export policy. Announced in April 2018, this policy replaced a similar 2015 Obama Administration measure and states that all U.S. UAS transfers “will be reviewed consistent with U.S. international nonproliferation commitments,” including Washington’s MTCR commitments. An April 19, 2018, National Security Presidential Memorandum from President Trump similarly states that the United States will continue its “participation in and support for” the regime. Category I UAS Exporters The United States has exported MTCR Category I UAS to France, Italy, Germany, and the United Kingdom; all of these governments are MTCR partners. Press and nongovernmental expert reports also name China and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) as exporters of MTCR Category I UAS. China is not an MTCR partner but agreed in 1992 to adhere to the MTCR guidelines. The UAE is not an MTCR partner; the government has no policy concerning Category I UAS exports, a UAE government representative told CRS on December 26, adding that the country needs no such policy because it does not produce or export such systems. Potential Threat Experts have expressed concern for at least 25 years that UAS proliferation would enable the spread of NBC weapons; specifically, some observers have argued that hostile actors could convert some types of UAS into cruise missiles or incorporate UAS technology into such missiles. RAND reports from 2014 and 2018 have downplayed this risk, however. Whether any country is acquiring or attempting to acquire UAS for developing or producing cruise missiles is unclear. Some observers have also warned that hostile governments or nonstate actors could use UAS for disseminating chemical and biological agents. The proliferation implications of the March 2018 U.S. proposal are uncertain. The relevant UAS “have essentially nothing to do with WMD,” Assistant Secretary of State U.S.-Proposed Missile Technology Control Regime Changes https://crsreports.congress.gov Christopher Ford stated on February 12, 2019. Faster delivery vehicles are widely regarded as more effective, but the potential effects of the proposal’s speed component on NBC weapons proliferation is unclear. Furthermore, relaxing MTCR UAS controls could set a negative precedent, according to at least one expert. Former State Department official Vann Van Diepen warned in a February 2018 speech that “changes made to MTCR Category I controls on non-cruise-missile UAVs” could legitimize a future MTCR decision to relax controls on conventionally armed Category I ballistic and cruise missiles, given these missiles’ “increasing role in conventional military operations.” Other MTCR Constraints on Proliferation The MTCR guidelines state that governments should consider six factors when considering requests for the export of MTCR annex items: (1) concerns about NBC proliferation; (2) the “capabilities and objectives of the missile and space programs of the recipient state”; (3) the “significance of the transfer in terms of the potential development” of NBC delivery systems; (4) the “assessment of the end use of the transfers,” including the government assurances described below; (5) the “applicability of relevant multilateral agreements”; and (6) the “risk of controlled items falling into the hands of terrorist groups and individuals.” The MTCR guidelines provide other mechanisms for preventing UAS exports from contributing to NBC weapons proliferation. For example, the guidelines stipulate that a strong presumption of denial applies to transfers of any item on the MTCR annex or any unlisted missile if the partner government “judges, on the basis of all available, persuasive information” that the items “are intended to be used for” NBC delivery. Moreover, partner governments’ export controls must require authorization for the transfer of unlisted items in cases where the government has informed an exporter that such items “may be intended, in their entirety or part, for use in connection with [NBC] delivery systems … other than manned aircraft.” These restrictions are known as “catch-all” controls. In addition, the MTCR guidelines state that, in cases where the exporting government does not judge the proposed Category I UAS transfer as intended for NBC delivery, the government is to obtain “binding government-to-government undertakings” from the recipient state that “[n]either the items nor replicas nor derivatives thereof will be retransferred without” the exporting government’s consent. The exporting government must also assume “responsibility for taking all steps necessary to ensure that the item is put only to its stated end-use.” Moreover, a government is only to authorize transfers of items that “could contribute to [an NBC] delivery system” if the government receives “appropriate assurances from the [recipient] government” that the recipient will use the items only for their stated purpose and will refrain from modifying, replicating, or retransferring the items without the exporting government’s prior consent. Other multilateral regimes restrict the export of technologies that could enable the development of NBC payloads for UAS. For example, the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) governs nuclear-related exports, and the Wassenaar Arrangement performs a similar function with respect to conventional arms and certain dual-use goods and technologies. The Australia Group is the analogous organization for technologies relevant to chemical and biological weapons. U.S. Controls In addition to the controls implemented as part of U.S. membership in the multilateral groups described above, the United States imposes a number of other restrictions on UAS exports. The State Department administers export controls on military UAS and other defense articles; the statutory basis for this system is the Arms Export Control Act (AECA) of 1976 (P.L. 94-329). Section 71(a) of that law requires the Secretary of State to maintain a list of all items on the MTCR annex that are not controlled pursuant to U.S. dual-use controls. The AECA also restricts the uses to which U.S.-origin defense articles may be put and prohibits transfers of such items to third parties without U.S. government permission. For example, Section 38(a)(2) requires that the executive branch “take into account” whether such an export would “contribute to an arms race or regional instability” or “aid in” NBC weapons development. The Export Controls Act of 2018 (P.L. 115-232, Subtitle B, Part I) provides broad, detailed legislative authority for the President to implement controls on the export of dual-use items, including dual-use UAS and related components. U.S. regulations on dual-use exports contain catch-all controls with respect to UAS. The U.S. government also implements regulations to ensure that recipients of U.S.-origin UAS use the items for their declared purpose. According to an April 2018 State Department fact sheet, the United States will transfer military UAS “only with appropriate technology security measures.” Both the State and Commerce Departments conduct end-monitoring to determine whether recipient countries are using exported items appropriately. Some military UAS “may be subject to enhanced end-use monitoring,” as well as “additional security conditions,” the State Department fact sheet says. According to the Defense Security Cooperation Agency, articles subject to such monitoring “are accompanied by specialized physical security and accountability notes.” U.S. transfers of MTCR Category I UAS also “shall require periodic consultations with” the U.S. government with respect to the systems’ use, according to the State Department fact sheet. Paul K. Kerr, Specialist in Nonproliferation IF11069 U.S.-Proposed Missile Technology Control Regime Changes https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF11069 · VERSION 4 · UPDATED Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. https://crsreports.congress.gov/		2020-05-07T11:51:56-0400
Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Updated April 21, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov RL34398 Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service Summary On February 24, 2011, the Department of Defense (DOD) announced the Boeing Company as the winner of a competition to build 179 new KC-46A aerial refueling tankers for the Air Force, a contract valued at roughly $35 billion. Prior to the announcement, the program had been known as KC-X. The first four KC-46s were delivered in January 2019. The KC-46A acquisition program is a subject of congressional interest because of the dollar value of the contract, the number of jobs it would create, the importance of tanker aircraft to U.S. military operations, and because previous attempts to acquire a new tanker since 2001 had ultimately failed. It has also attracted attention due to cost growth, schedule delays, and other issues with program execution. DOD’s KC-46A acquisition strategy poses potential oversight issues for Congress, including  What alternatives does the Air Force have to extend KC-135 service life or cope in other ways with the KC-46 delays?  What are the effects of budget cuts on executability of the KC-46A program?  Do contracts that place cost risk on contractors create positive incentives for performance? FY2020 defense authorization bill: The explanatory statement accompanying S. 1790 recommended $2.199 billion for the KC-46A program, $36.0 million less than the Administration’s request. FY2020 defense appropriations bill: The Joint Explanatory Statement of the Committee of Conference on S. 2474 approved $2.14 billion for the KC-46A program, a decrease of $94.8 million from the Administration’s request. The Administration requested $2.85 billion in procurement funding for the KC-46 in FY2021. FY2021 defense authorization and appropriations bills were in progress as of the date of this report. Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Recent Developments ...................................................................................................................... 2 Initial Deliveries ........................................................................................................................ 2 Ongoing Technical Issues .......................................................................................................... 2 Refueling Boom and Remote Vision System ...................................................................... 2 Leaking Fuel System........................................................................................................... 3 Load Floor ........................................................................................................................... 3 Foreign Debris Contamination ............................................................................................ 3 Financial Consequences ...................................................................................................... 4 Alternative tanking capability ................................................................................................... 4 Background ..................................................................................................................................... 4 Air Force Refueling Tankers ..................................................................................................... 4 Roles and Missions ............................................................................................................. 4 Current Tanker Fleet ........................................................................................................... 4 KC-46A Program Basics ........................................................................................................... 7 Numbers of Aircraft ............................................................................................................ 7 Acquisition Cost ................................................................................................................. 8 Contract Structure ............................................................................................................... 8 Program Schedule ............................................................................................................... 8 Basing ........................................................................................................................................ 9 Foreign Interest in Acquiring KC-46As .................................................................................... 9 Statements on KC-X Priority .................................................................................................. 10 Industrial Base ......................................................................................................................... 10 Asserted Employment Effects ........................................................................................... 10 Acquisition Strategy and Draft RFP......................................................................................... 11 Response to the Draft RFP ................................................................................................ 12 Final RFP .......................................................................................................................... 13 Legislative Activity for 2020 ......................................................................................................... 14 FY2020 Funding Request ....................................................................................................... 14 FY2020 Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 2500/S. 1790) ....................................................... 14 House ................................................................................................................................ 14 Senate ................................................................................................................................ 15 Final Action ....................................................................................................................... 15 FY2020 Defense Appropriations Act (H.R. 2968/S. 2474) ..................................................... 15 House ................................................................................................................................ 15 Senate ................................................................................................................................ 15 Final Action ....................................................................................................................... 16 Figures Figure 1. KC-46A Pegasus .............................................................................................................. 1 Figure 2. KC-135 Stratotanker ........................................................................................................ 6 Figure 3. KC-10 Extender ............................................................................................................... 7 Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service Tables Table 1. KC-46 LRIP Lots ............................................................................................................... 9 Table 2. Major Differences Between KC-X Draft RFP and Final Document ............................... 13 Appendixes Appendix A. Potential Longevity of KC-135 Fleet ....................................................................... 17 Contacts Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 18 Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction Figure 1. KC-46A Pegasus Source: U.S. Air Force photo by Master Sgt. Michael Jackson. Note: Shown with F-15E Strike Eagle above Edwards AFB, CA. On February 24, 2011, the Department of Defense (DOD) announced the Boeing Company as the winner of a competition to build 179 new KC-46A aerial refueling tankers for the Air Force, a contract valued at roughly $35 billion. These KC-46As, to be procured at a maximum rate of 15 aircraft per year, are to replace roughly one-third of the Air Force’s aging fleet of KC-135 aerial refueling tankers. The Air Force and the U.S. Transportation Command state that replacing the KC-135s is their highest recapitalization priority. The Administration’s proposed FY2021 defense budget requested $2.85 billion in Air Force procurement funding to continue KC-46A acquisition. The KC-46A acquisition program is a subject of interest because of the dollar value of the contract, the number of jobs it may create, the importance of tanker aircraft to U.S. military operations, and because previous attempts by DOD to move ahead with a KC-X acquisition program over the last several years have led to controversy and ultimately failed. The history of those earlier attempts forms an important part of the context for DOD’s KC-X competition, particularly in defining the required capabilities for the KC-46A and designing and conducting a fair and transparent competition. Further, the Air Force has recently changed its acquisition objective for the KC-46 program and its plan for the future composition of the tanker fleet. Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 2 Ongoing issues for Congress include whether to approve, reject, or modify the Air Force’s request for KC-46A program funding, the revised tanker acquisition plan, and the effects of KC-46 program issues on the Air Force’s ability to meet its mobility requirements. Congress’s decision on these issues could affect DOD capabilities and funding requirements, Air Force force structure, and the aircraft manufacturing industrial base. Recent Developments Initial Deliveries The first four KC-46 aircraft were delivered to McConnell AFB, KS, in January 2019.1 As of March 5, 2020, 31 KC-46As had been delivered to the Air Force.2 The formal initial operational test and evaluation process began on June 4, 2019.3 Ongoing Technical Issues Refueling Boom and Remote Vision System In previous tanker aircraft, the refueling boom operator was stationed at the rear of the plane, looking directly at the receiving aircraft. The KC-46A places the boom operator on the flight deck, viewing receivers through a camera-driven display called the Remote Vision System (RVS). Currently, “RVS presents imagery that is distorted in certain lighting conditions, posing difficulties for boom operators and leading to incidents of accidental scraping of the surface of receiver aircraft with the boom.”4 Boeing and the Air Force agreed in April 2020 on a plan to address the RVS issues. “Boeing is paying for a series of interim software and hardware upgrades to the current RVS design, as well as all the new technology for the next-generation RVS 2.0.” 5 In exchange, DOD will release $882 million in withheld progress payments.6 The revisions to RVS may allow autonomous refueling in the future.7 1 U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Armed Services, Subcommittee on Airland, Air Force, Force Structure and Modernization Programs, 116th Cong., 2nd sess., April 9, 2019, prepared testimony of Air Force witnesses. 2 Boeing Company, “Boeing honors Gold Star family at KC-46 delivery,” press release, March 5, 2020, http://www.boeing.com/features/2020/03/gold-star-family-03-20.page. 3 U.S. Air Force, “First KC-46 IOT&E flight successful,” press release, June 4, 2019, https://www.amc.af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/1875479/first-kc-46-iote-flight-successful/. 4 Valerie Insinna, “AMC commander: Boeing has not made progress on KC-46,” Defense News, September 18, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/digital-show-dailies/air-force-association/2019/09/18/amc-commander-boeing-has-not-made-progress-on-kc-46/. 5 Theresa Hitchens, “AF, Boeing Reach Deal To Fix KC-46 Cameras,” Breaking Defense, April 2, 2020, https://breakingdefense.com/2020/04/af-boeing-reach-deal-to-fix-kc-46-cameras/. 6 Lee Hudson, “Boeing, USAF Agree On Dramatic KC-46 Remote Vision System Redesign,” Aviation Week and Space Technology, April 3, 2020, https://aviationweek.com/defense-space/aircraft-propulsion/boeing-usaf-agree-dramatic-kc-46-remote-vision-system-redesign. 7 Valerie Insinna, “Boeing’s KC-46 tanker now has a pathway for autonomous aerial refueling,” Defense News, April 8, 2020, https://www.defensenews.com/air/2020/04/08/boeings-kc-46-tanker-now-has-a-pathway-for-autonomous-aerial-refueling/. Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 3 Separately, the Air Force agreed to pay $55.5 million to redesign the refueling boom after the Air Force-provided specifications were found to be unsuitable for some receiver aircraft.8Necessary modifications to the KC-46 fleet will take some time. According to Air Force acquisition chief Dr. William B. Roper Jr. and Deputy Chief of Staff for Strategy, Integration and Requirements Lt. Gen. Timothy G. Fay, we have worked hard to accept the KC-46 while ensuring its major deficiencies—the Remote Visual System (RVS) and boom—are properly addressed without undue burden on taxpayers or warfighters. We initiated a subject matter expert team that derived critical performance parameters for both the RVS and boom and codified these parameters in a legally-binding agreement with the vendor. Due to the extensive nature of the fixes, especially the RVS, both actions will take 3-4 years to implement and retrofit fully across our fleet.9 Leaking Fuel System In April 2020, Boeing and the Air Force agreed on a fix to a known KC-46 deficiency involving leaks from its fuel system. The deficiency had been known since mid-2019, but the service had elevated the deficiency to a category 1, or critical deficiency, on March 31, 2020.10 Load Floor In September 2019, the Air Force discovered a problem in the system designed to restrain cargo in the KC-46 that could allow cargo to shift in flight, a condition that has led to aircraft losses in the past. The Air Force subsequently restricted the KC-46 from carrying passengers and cargo. That restriction was lifted on December 18, 2019.11 Foreign Debris Contamination The Defense Contract Management Agency and the Air Force halted acceptance of KC-46s in March 2019, and again in April 2019, following the discovery of debris in fuel tanks and other parts of the aircraft believed to remain from the manufacturing process.12 Deliveries resumed following an agreement on revised inspection procedures.13 8 Steve Trimble, “KC-46 Boom Actuator Redesign Cost Set At $55.5 Million,” Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, August 5, 2019, https://aviationweek.com/defense/kc-46-boom-actuator-redesign-cost-set-555-million. 9 U.S. Congress, House Committee on Armed Services, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces, Air Force, Force Structure and Modernization, 116th Cong., 2nd sess., March 14, 2019, statement of Air Force witnesses. 10 Lee Hudson, “Boeing Begins Fixing KC-46 Fuel System,” Aviation Week and Space Technology, April 3, 2020, https://aviationweek.com/defense-space/aircraft-propulsion/boeing-begins-fixing-kc-46-fuel-system. 11 Valerie Insinna, “The KC-46 is back to carrying cargo and passengers,” Defense News, December 20, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/air/2019/12/20/the-kc-46-is-back-to-carrying-cargo-and-passengers/. 12 Colin Clark, “DCMA Orders Safety Halt To KC-46 Deliveries; Roper Promises Close Scrutiny,” Breaking Defense, February 28, 2019, https://breakingdefense.com/2019/02/dcma-orders-safety-halt-to-kc-46-deliveries-roper-promises-close-scrutiny/. Stephen Losey, “Air Force again halts KC-46 deliveries after more debris found,” Defense News, April 2, 2019, https://www.airforcetimes.com/news/your-air-force/2019/04/02/air-force-again-halts-kc-46-deliveries-after-more-debris-found/. Vivienne Machi, “Air Force Once Again Halts KC-46 Deliveries Due to Debris on Boeing Flight Line,” Defense Daily, April 2, 2019, https://www.defensedaily.com/air-force-halts-kc-46-deliveries-due-debris-boeing-flight-line/air-force/. 13 Valerie Insinna, “Air Force improves new inspection plan for KC-46s, paving the way for deliveries to restart,” Defense News, April 9, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/air/2019/04/09/air-force-improves-new-inspection-plan-for-kc-46s-paving-the-way-for-deliveries-to-restart/. Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 4 Financial Consequences Because the KC-46A is being acquired under a fixed-price contract, Boeing is responsible for expenses beyond the initial $4.9 billion award for development. As of August 2019, the company has paid more than $3.5 billion to fund corrections to ongoing technical issues.14 “When it won the KC-46 contract in 2011, Boeing acknowledged underbidding what it thought the program would cost, saying it expected a long-term support and foreign sales market would more than make up for its initial losses on the program.”15 Alternative tanking capability In January 2020, the head of U.S. Transportation Command proposed leasing tanker aircraft to increase fleet capability and “mitigate the delayed fielding of the KC-46.” Other countries use leased tankers operationally, and the U.S. Navy includes them during training.16 Background Air Force Refueling Tankers Roles and Missions Aerial refueling aircraft—commonly called tankers—provide in-flight refueling services to bombers, fighters, airlifters, surveillance aircraft, and other types of aircraft flown by the U.S. military. Tankers enable other aircraft to deploy quickly to distant theaters of operation, and to remain in the air longer while operating in those theaters. Aerial refueling capability is a critical component of the U.S. military’s ability to project power overseas and to operate military aircraft in theater with maximum effectiveness. The Air Force operates the U.S. long-range tanker fleet, the subject of this report. The Navy and Marine Corps also operate shorter-range tankers in support of tactical missions. Current Tanker Fleet KC-135 Stratotanker The Air Force’s current fleet of large tankers consists of 396 KC-135 Stratotankers.17 The first KC-135 entered the Air Force inventory in 1956, and the final one was delivered in 1964. Current 14 “Boeing’s tanker program records $2.31 billion in losses over 3 years,” Reuters, February 8, 2019, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-boeing-tanker/boeings-tanker-program-records-2-31-billion-in-losses-over-3-years-idUSKCN1PX29B. Steve Trimble, “KC-46 Boom Actuator Redesign Cost Set At $55.5 Million,” Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, August 5, 2019, https://aviationweek.com/defense/kc-46-boom-actuator-redesign-cost-set-555-million. 15 John A. Tirpak, “Boeing’s International KC-46 Sales Pitch: Let USAF Pay For R&D,” Air Force magazine, March 21, 2019, http://airforcemag.com/Features/Pages/2019/May%202019/Boeings-International-KC-46-Sales-Pitch-Let-USAF-Pay-For-RD.aspx. 16 Army Gen. Stephen Lyons, quoted in Oriana Pawlyk, “Pentagon Should Explore Renting Refuelers Amid KC-46 Delays, General Says,” Military.com, January 28, 2020, https://www.military.com/daily-news/2020/01/28/pentagon-should-explore-renting-refuelers-amid-kc-46-delays-general-says.html. 17 U.S. Congress, House Committee on Armed Services, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces, Air Force, Force Structure and Modernization, 116th Cong., 2nd sess., March 14, 2019, statement of Air Force witnesses. Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 5 KC-135s average 57 years of age.18 The aircraft have received various upgrades and modifications over the years, including new engines.19 DOD states that if new tankers are procured at a rate of 15 per year, the last KC-135R would be more than 80 years old at retirement. (For a discussion of the potential longevity of the KC-135 fleet, see Appendix A.) A Government Accountability Office study reported that The cost of maintaining those KC-135 aircraft is estimated to be about $10.3 million per year per aircraft. Additionally, about $12 million per aircraft may also be needed, according to [Air Mobility] Command officials, for depot maintenance activities that are scheduled every 5 years. Command officials stated that the number of depot events that are needed will depend on how quickly Boeing can deliver expected KC-46 aircraft.20 18 U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Armed Services, Subcommittee on Airland, Air Force, Force Structure and Modernization Programs, 116th Cong., 2nd sess., April 9, 2019, prepared testimony of Air Force witnesses. 19 Air Force Fact sheet on the KC-135, available online at https://go.usa.gov/xVJur. The fact sheet was accessed by CRS on October 16, 2019, at which time it carried a date of May 14, 2018. The fact sheet states that: Of the original KC-135As, more than 417 were modified with new CFM-56 engines produced by CFM-International. The re-engined tanker, designated either the KC-135R or KC-135T, can offload 50 percent more fuel, is 25 percent more fuel efficient, costs 25 percent less to operate and is 96 percent quieter than the KC-135A. Under another modification program, a re-engined tanker with the TF-33-PW-102 engine was designated the KC-135E. In 2009, the last KC-135E retired from the inventory. Through the years, the KC-135 has been altered to do other jobs ranging from flying command post missions to reconnaissance. RC-135s are used for special reconnaissance and Air Force Materiel Command’s NKC-135A’s are flown in test programs. Air Combat Command operates the OC-135 as an observation platform in compliance with the Open Skies Treaty. The KC-135R and KC-135T aircraft continue to undergo life-cycle upgrades to expand their capabilities and improve reliability. Among these are improved communications, navigation, autopilot and surveillance equipment to meet future civil air traffic control needs. 20 U.S. Government Accountability Office, KC-46 TANKER MODERNIZATION[:] Program Cost Is Stable, but Schedule May Be Further Delayed, GAO-18-353, April 2018, p. 13, https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/691327.pdf. Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 6 Figure 2. KC-135 Stratotanker Source: U.S. Air Force photo by Senior Airman Mark Hybers. KC-10 Extender The Air Force’s fleet of large tankers also includes 59 KC-10 Extender aerial refueling aircraft, the first of which entered service in 1981.21 The KC-10 is a much larger aircraft than the KC-135 or the KC-46A, and is capable of offloading substantially more fuel.22 21 Air Force fact sheet on the KC-10, available online at https://go.usa.gov/xVJzt. The fact sheet was accessed by CRS on October 16, 2019, at which time it carried a date of October 1, 2003. The fact sheet states that the KC-10 can transport up to 75 people and nearly 170,000 pounds (76,560 kilograms) of cargo a distance of about 4,400 miles (7,040 kilometers) unrefueled. 22 Stewart Welch and David Leroy, “The Case for a Three-Tanker Air Force,” War on the Rocks, October 11, 2019, https://warontherocks.com/2019/10/the-case-for-a-three-tanker-air-force/. Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 7 Figure 3. KC-10 Extender Source: U.S. Air Force photo. In addition to KC-135s and KC-10s, the Air Force, Marine Corps, and Navy operate additional smaller refueling aircraft. The Air Force uses modified C-130s to refuel Air Force special operations and combat search and rescue helicopters. The Marine Corps uses modified C-130s to refuel Marine helicopters and fighters. Some Navy aircraft have been configured to give them a secondary capability to refuel other Navy or Marine Corps aircraft in flight. The Navy also provides some aerial refueling through a private fee-for-service vendor. KC-46A Program Basics Numbers of Aircraft DOD originally envisaged replacing the KC-135 fleet in three stages. The 179 new KC-46As procured through the KC-X competition would replace roughly one-third of the KC-135 fleet. A further 179 tankers would be procured in a second competition called KC-Y (envisioned as a KC-46A continuation or follow-on.) A third program, KC-Z, was to be a probable replacement for the KC-10 fleet. Subsequently, DOD dropped plans for the KC-Z, envisioning it instead as a third tranche of KC-46s.23 23 CRS In Focus IF10999, Defense’s 30-Year Aircraft Plan Reveals New Details. Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 8 Acquisition Cost A May 2019 GAO report states that the procurement cost of 179 KC-46As could be about $31.5 billion,24 or an average of about $226 million per aircraft. Contract Structure The KC-46A is being acquired using a fixed-price incentive development contract with firm-fixed and not-to-exceed pricing or production. This contract structure effectively limits the total cost borne by taxpayers, with most of the cost growth risk placed on the contractor. The target value is $4.4 billion, with government liability limited for costs over $4.9 billion. Boeing sources confirmed that arrangement on Wednesday, saying if the costs fall in the $3.9 billion to $4.9 billion “delta,” the Air Force would pay 60 percent and Boeing 40 percent. That is the contract structure and cost arrangement accepted by the Air Force, the Boeing sources said, noting the service weighed this against cost projections for the same scenario offered by Airbus‘s EADS.25 The tanker’s estimated development costs are currently around $900 million higher than the February 2011 contract award value, but the USAF is liable for only about $500 million of this total. The remaining $400 million is Boeing’s responsibility.26 Program Schedule In 2011 testimony before the House Armed Services Committee Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces, the then-Air Force acquisition executive stated: VAN BUREN: Well, the contract that we currently have runs through 2016 for EMD. We'll have a preliminary design review in 2012, critical design review in ‘13, build the aircraft, first flight of the 767-2C in 2014. And ... AKIN: So the first flight’s 2014. OK. And then? VAN BUREN: Roughly three years from contract award. And then we'll have the full-up KC-46 first flight at the end of 2014.27 The first flight was accomplished on September 25, 2015.28 Under the EMD contract, Boeing was to deliver the first 18 KC-46As by August 2017.29 A series of complications resulted in first delivery occurring in January 2019. Delivery of the 179 initial KC-46As is expected by 2028.30 24 U.S. Government Accountability Office, WEAPON SYSTEMS ANNUAL ASSESSMENT[:] Limited Use of Knowledge-Based Practices Continues to Undercut DOD’s Investments, 19-336SP, May 2019, p. 155, https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/698933.pdf. 25 John T. Bennett, “Boeing official says nothing’s changed in Air Force tanker plans,” The Hill, July 20, 2011. 26 Dave Majumdar, “IN FOCUS: Boeing must deliver on KC-46, USAF says,” FlightGlobal.com, April 23, 2012. 27 Testimony of David Van Buren, Air Force Service Acquisition Executive, before the U.S. Congress, House Committee on Armed Services, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces, Aerial Refueling Aircraft Programs, 112th Cong., 2nd sess., October 13, 2011. 28 U.S. Air Force, “KC-46A tanker completes successful first flight,” press release, September 25, 2015, https://www.af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/620629/kc-46a-tanker-completes-successful-first-flight/. 29 U.S. Government Accountability Office, KC-46 TANKER MODERNIZATION[:] Program Cost Is Stable, but Schedule May Be Further Delayed, GAO-18-353, April 2018, https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/691327.pdf. 30 U.S. Congress, House Committee on Armed Services, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces, Air Force, Force Structure and Modernization, 116th Cong., 2nd sess., March 14, 2019, statement of Air Force witnesses. Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 9 The Air Force is purchasing KC-46 in annual low-rate initial production (LRIP) lots. Table 1. KC-46 LRIP Lots (values include spares and support equipment) Lot # Awarded # of aircraft Value ($B) 1 August 18, 2016 7 2.5 (1 & 2) 2 August 18, 2016 12 3 January 27, 2017 15 2.1 4 September 10, 2018 18 2.9 5 September 27, 2019 15 2.6 Total 67 10.1 Source: Compiled from various contract award announcements. Basing In January 2013, the Air Force announced the list of candidate bases to host the first tranche of KC-46As. Three bases were to be selected from the list: one to host training, and one base each from the active Air Force and Air National Guard to host operational KC-46s. “Ultimately, the Air Force will establish 10 main operating bases for the 179 tankers that it plans to buy.”31 Altus AFB, OK, and McConnell AFB, KS, were candidate bases for the KC-46A training unit. Altus and McConnell were also candidates to be the first active-duty led KC-46A main operating base, as were Fairchild Air Force Base, WA, and Grand Forks Air Force Base, ND. Forbes Air Guard Station, KS; Joint-Base McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst, NJ; Pease Air Guard Station, NH; Pittsburgh International Airport Air Guard Station, PA; and Rickenbacker Air Guard Station, OH, were candidates to be the first Air National Guard led KC-46A main operating base.32 In May 2013, the Air Force selected Altus as the main training base, McConnell as the initial operating base, and Pease and Forbes as the first National Guard operating bases.33 Foreign Interest in Acquiring KC-46As Japan has ordered two KC-46As and budgeted for two more; sale of the first two was approved by the United States in September 2016.34 The United Arab Emirates have reportedly issued a letter of request for three KC-46As.35 31 Jeff Schogol, “Nine bases on final list to host KC-46 tanker,” AirForceTimes.com, January 13, 2013. 32 Department of Defense, “Air Force Announces KC-46A Candidate Bases,” press release, January 9, 2013, http://www.defense.gov/releases/release.aspx?releaseid=15771. 33 Air Mobility Command, “McConnell selected as KC-46A MOB,” press release, May 23, 2013, https://www.amc.af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/144263/mcconnell-selected-as-kc-46a-mob/. 34 Mike Yeo, “Here’s what Japan’s Defense Ministry wants to do with $50.5 billion,” Defense News, September 4, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/global/asia-pacific/2019/08/30/heres-what-japans-defense-ministry-wants-to-do-with-505-billion/. Valerie Insinna, “State Department Clears $1.9B Sale of KC-46A Tankers to Japan,” Defense News, September 22, 2016, https://www.defensenews.com/air/2016/09/22/state-department-clears-1-9b-sale-of-kc-46a-tankers-to-japan/. 35 Mike Yeo, “UAE issues formal request to buy KC-46A tanker, says Boeing,” Defense News, May 31, 2019, Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 10 In September 2012, the government of Singapore submitted a request for information to begin evaluating the KC-46A as a possible replacement for Singapore’s KC-135 tankers, but ultimately chose the Airbus A330 MRTT.36 After evaluating the KC-46, South Korea also chose the A330.37 Statements on KC-X Priority DOD stated that “with the average age of the [KC-135] inventory over 45 years old, a new Tanker has become an operational necessity as well as a financially prudent decision to meet refueling requirements.”38 The Air Force testified in May 2013 that: Replacing one-third of the 50 year-old KC-135 aerial refueling tanker fleet with the KC-46A is our top Air Force acquisition priority. The KC-46A program will ensure that our Nation retains a tanker fleet able to provide crucial air refueling capacity worldwide for decades to come. In FY14, we programmed $1.6 billion dollars for the manufacture of four developmental aircraft. The initial flights of the KC46A test aircraft are scheduled to begin in FY14. The program is currently executing as planned, and we are on track to receive 18 operational aircraft by late FY17. Until the KC-46A reaches full operational capability, we are resourcing critical modernization of the KC-10 and KC-135 tanker fleets. 39 Industrial Base Asserted Employment Effects Boeing’s initial plan for the KC-46A called for 767s to be assembled at the Boeing plant in Everett, WA, and be converted into tankers at Boeing’s plant in Wichita, KS. Boeing claimed that “nationwide, the NewGen Tanker program will support approximately 50,000 total U.S. jobs with Boeing and more than 800 suppliers in more than 40 states.”40 Subsequently, Boeing decided to close the Wichita facility and instead complete the tankers in Everett, WA. With regard to the change, Major General Christopher Bogdan, then the KC-46A program manager, said: Without a doubt, closing Wichita is a change to the plan, and any change on a program like this is going to introduce some uncertainty and some risk... And so, quite frankly, we are going to hold them accountable to make sure that the risks don’t manifest themselves. To https://www.defensenews.com/global/mideast-africa/2019/05/31/uae-issues-formal-request-to-buy-kc-46a-tanker-says-boeing/. 36 Michael Hoffman, “Fixed-price tanker contract at risk,” DoDBuzz.com, September 18, 2012. See also Andrea Shalal-Esa, “Air Force Says Vigilant On Boeing Tanker Program,” Reuters.com, September 18, 2012, and Colin Clark, “Boeing Plows Through KC-46 Reserve Funding; Sequestration Would Be ‘Near Catastrophic’,” AOL Defense, September 18, 2012. Greg Waldron, “Singapore joins ranks of A330 MRTT operators,” FlightGlobal, August 15, 2018, https://www.flightglobal.com/news/articles/singapore-joins-ranks-of-a330-mrtt-operators-451153/. 37 Jeyup S. Kwaak and Robert Wall, “Airbus Beats Boeing in Contract for South Korean Refuel Tankers,” The Wall Street Journal, June 30, 2015, https://www.wsj.com/articles/airbus-beats-boeing-in-contract-for-south-korean-refuel-tankers-1435656751. 38 Department of Defense, Fiscal Year 2010 Budget Request, Summary Justification, May 2009, pp. 1-50. 39 Statement of Michael B. Donley, Secretary of the Air Force, and General Mark A. Welsh IIII, Chief of Staff, United States Air Force, Before the Senate Armed Services Committee [Hearing] May 7, 2013, pp. 11-12. 40 Boeing, “Boeing Statement on EADS’ Decision to Enter KC-X Tanker Competition,” press release, April 20, 2010, http://www.unitedstatestanker.com/media/Statement-20100420. Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 11 do that I’ve got to make sure they have plans in place and we are involved in the oversight of that move … under the same cost structure, under the same schedule with the same requirements.41 Acquisition Strategy and Draft RFP Several attempts were made to start a KC-135 replacement program.42 The FY2002 DOD Appropriations Act (P.L. 107-117), the FY2002 supplemental (P.L. 107-206), the FY2003 DOD Appropriations Act (P.L. 107-248), and the FY2003 DOD Authorization Act (P.L. 107-314) included statutory authority for the Air Force to lease 100 Boeing 767 tankers.43 This legislation did not include a competition among candidate aircraft, and both that notion and the concept of leasing military aircraft proved controversial. Following disclosure of improper negotiations between Boeing and an Air Force procurement official involved in the lease, the lease authorization was repealed in Section 133 of the FY2005 Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 108-375.) In January 2007, the Air Force published a request for proposals to acquire a “KC-X Refueling Tanker Aircraft.”44 KC-X was a competition between Boeing and a team of Northrop Grumman and EADS that resulted in DOD awarding a contract to Northrop/EADS in February 2008. Boeing protested that award, and in June 2008, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) sustained Boeing’s protest, agreeing with Boeing that the competition was conducted in a flawed manner.45 GAO’s ruling prompted DOD to cancel the 2008 KC-X competition and temporarily take control of the KC-X acquisition away from the Air Force. The Bush Administration decided to defer the next attempt at a KC-X acquisition program to the Obama Administration. The competition strategy for that next attempt was announced at a September 24, 2009, DOD news briefing. According to DOD, key features of the competition strategy included the following:  The proposed KC-X competition strategy, known more formally as the Source Selection Strategy, was devised jointly by the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) and the Air Force and was approved by the Secretary of Defense.  The Air Force will be the Source Selection Authority (SSA) for the competition, as announced by the Secretary of Defense on September 16, 2009.  DOD intends to select a sole winner for the KC-X competition; DOD does not intend to split the KC-X program between the two bidders.  The competition will be evaluated on a best-value (rather than lowest-cost) basis that will take both price and non-price factors into account. The evaluation will include mandatory and non-mandatory/trade space capabilities, acquisition price, warfighting effectiveness, and day-to-day efficiency. 41 Amy Butler, “USAF Tanker Chief Sees Wichita Move Complicating Program,” Aerospace Daily, April 3, 2012. 42 A fuller discussion of the attempts to acquire a KC-135 replacement can be found in Shane Harris, “Own the Sky,” Washingtonian, November 1, 2010, https://www.washingtonian.com/2010/11/01/own-the-sky/. 43 CRS Report RL32056, The Air Force KC-767 Lease Proposal, by Christopher Bolkcom (nondistributable but available to congressional clients from the author). 44 AF News, Air Force posts KC-X request for proposals, U.S. Air Force, January 31, 2007, https://go.usa.gov/xVJFQ. Solicitation Number FA8625-07-R-6470, https://go.usa.gov/xVJFv. 45 For more on GAO bid protests generally, see CRS Report R45080, Government Contract Bid Protests: Analysis of Legal Processes and Recent Developments, by David H. Carpenter. Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 12  The competition will differ in many details from the 2007-2008 competition and does not constitute a re-run of the 2007-2008 competition. DOD states that, among other things, the selection criteria to be used in the new competition are more precise and less subjective than those used in the 2007-2008 competition.  The contracts to be awarded are to be fixed-price type contracts. The winning bidder will receive a fixed-price incentive fee contract with a ceiling for the Engineering and Manufacturing Development (EMD) phase of the program, which includes the first four aircraft. A firm fixed-price (FFP) contract will be used for the next 64 aircraft (production lots 1 through 5). A not-to-exceed contract will be used for the final 111 aircraft (lots 6 through 13). An FFP contract will be used for five years of initial contractor support.  Following the release of the final RFP, bidders will have about 75 days to prepare and submit their bid. The government will evaluate the bids for about 120 days, and prepare a contract award over a subsequent period of about 30 days. DOD anticipates awarding the contract in the summer of 2010 (since revised to January 2011).  The first KC-X is projected to be delivered in 2015, and Initial Operating Capability (IOC) for the KC-X is scheduled for 2017. Delivery of all 179 KC-Xs will occur over a period of more than 15 years. As KC-Xs are integrated into the fleet, the Air Force intends to begin evaluating its future tanker needs and begin work on the KC-Y program. Response to the Draft RFP On December 1, 2009, Wes Bush, the president and chief executive officer of Northrop Grumman, sent a letter to Under Secretary Carter stating that unless the draft RFP were substantially revised, Northrop Grumman would decline to bid in the KC-X competition. A press report that day stated: Northrop Grumman Corp., the third- largest U.S. defense company, said it won’t bid for the $35 billion Air Force refueling tanker program unless the draft request for proposals is changed, citing “financial burdens.” The Pentagon has declined to amend the request and didn’t plan to “substantially” address Northrop’s concerns, Chief Executive Officer Wes Bush wrote in a Dec. 1 letter to Pentagon acquisition chief Ashton Carter. “As a result, I must regrettably inform you that, absent a responsive set of changes in the final RFP, Northrop Grumman has determined that it cannot submit a bid,” he wrote. Northrop and partner European Aeronautic Defence & Space Co. were vying against Boeing Co. to build the refueling tankers. The competition was restarted in September after Boeing successfully protested the award to Northrop and EADS last year. The Pentagon’s request shows a “clear preference” for a smaller tanker than the modified Airbus A330 that Northrop plans to offer, and continuing to compete for the tankers would impose “contractual and financial burdens on the company that we simply cannot accept,” Bush wrote in the letter. “The Department regrets that Northrop Grumman and Airbus have taken themselves out of the tanker competition and hope they will return when the final request for proposals is issued,” Pentagon spokesman Bryan Whitman said in an e-mail. “The Department wants competition but cannot compel the two airplane makers to compete.”… Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 13 Both competitors “have suggested changes to the request for proposals that would favor their offering,” Whitman wrote in the e-mail. “But the Department cannot and will not change the warfighter requirements for the tanker to give advantage to either competitor.”46 Final RFP The final KC-X RFP was issued on February 24, 2010. Overall, the final requirements for the KC-X aircraft appeared to have changed little from those in the draft RFP. One requirement was eliminated (bringing the total to 372), and none added. The financial structure of the proposed contract, however, changed substantially. Table 2. Major Differences Between KC-X Draft RFP and Final Document Issue Draft RFP Final RFP Microwave Landing System Required Not required Large Aircraft Infrared Countermeasures Contractor to procure and include in price Government will furnish Contract type Development phase: Fixed-price with incentive fee. Development phase unchanged. Production lots 1-2: Firm fixed price. Production lots 1-2 unchanged. Production lots 3-5: Firm fixed price, with 5% inflation trigger for price adjustment. Production lots 3-5: Not to Exceed, with 2.5% inflation trigger. Production lots 6-13: Not to Exceed, with 5% trigger. Production lots 6-13: Not to Exceed, with 1% trigger. Contractor support: Firm fixed price. Contractor support unchanged. Mission modeling IFARA (Integrated Fleet Air Refueling Assessment) model used to determine operational suitability. IFARA ground rules updated “to ensure they reflected current operational practices.”a Alert quick-start Did not specify temperatures at which power carts were allowed for environmental control. Established a range of temperatures for which power carts could be allowed for both heating and cooling the aircraft. Fuel burn Penalty if actual fuel use exceeds contractor’s proposal. Incentive if fuel use is less than contractor’s proposal. Proposal due date 60 days 75 days Source: CRS analysis. a. Briefing script of Dr. Ashton Carter, Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, & Logistics, obtained by CRS. After evaluating the final RFP, on March 8, 2010, the Northrop/EADS team withdrew from the competition.47 46 Gopal Ratnam and Alison Fitzgerald, “Northrop Declines Tanker Bid on ‘Financial Burdens’ (Update2),” Bloomberg.com, December 1, 2009. 47 See, inter alia, Colin Clark, “Northrop Drops Tanker Bid,” DoD Buzz, March 8, 2010 and John Reed, “Northrop Won't Bid on USAF Tanker,” DefenseNews.com, March 8, 2010. Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 14 DOD then extended the bid deadline by 60 days, to July 9, 2010.48 Subsequently, on April 20, 2010, EADS announced that its North American division would enter the competition on its own.49 On February 24, 2011, the DOD announced the Boeing Company as the winner of the KC-X competition. Legislative Activity for 2020 FY2020 Funding Request The Administration’s proposed FY2020 defense budget requested $2,234.5 million in Air Force procurement funding to acquire 12 KC-46As and 59.6 million in Air Force research and development funds for further development. FY2020 Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 2500/S. 1790) House The House Armed Services Committee, in its report accompanying H.R. 2500, recommended funding KC-46 procurement at $2,199.7 million, a reduction of $34.8 million from the requested amount designated as “early to need.” The committee recommended the requested amount for R&D. The House report also included the following provisions: Tanker force structure and modernization The committee notes that the Department of Defense Mobility Capability Requirement Study identified a tanker force structure inventory requirement of 479 aircraft. Integral to this capability is the delivery of mission capable KC-46A aircraft and the continued development of additional tanker aircraft after the expiration of the current KC-46A contract with lot 13 in 2027. The committee notes that the Secretary of the Air Force has completed a capability-based assessment and signed out the initial capability document for the requirements associated with the next-generation tanker, but has not started an analysis of alternatives. The committee believes that the Secretary of the Air Force has several viable options to ensure future tanker capability, to include acquiring a non-developmental commercial derivative tanker while “bridging” from the end of the KC-46A production to the new developmental tanker. Therefore, the committee directs the Secretary of the Air Force to submit a report to the congressional defense committees by September 30, 2020, on a 30-year vision for the tanker force structure. The report shall include the following: (1) the current KC-46A tanker acquisition timeline through lot 13; (2) future tanker production options to include an acquisition timeline comparison of a “bridging” non-developmental commercial derivative tanker and new tanker development; and 48 Michael Bruno, “USAF KC-X Bid Deadline Extended 60 Days,” AviationWeek/Ares blog, March 31, 2010. 49 John Reed, “EADS Confident Its KC-45 Can Compete for USAF Tanker Bid,” DefenseNews.com, April 20, 2010. Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 15 (3) modernization options for the entire tanker force structure through the 30-year vision timeline. Additionally, the committee continues to support the fixed-price development and production of the KC-46A contract. The committee believes that there have been several lessons learned with unique fixed-price type contracts that were employed in this contract. Therefore, in accordance with a recommendation included in the Government Accountability Office (GAO) report entitled “KC-46 Tanker Modernization: Aircraft Delivery Has Begun, but Deficiencies Could Affect Operations and Will Take Time to Correct” (GAO-19-480), the committee directs the Secretary of the Air Force to submit a report to the congressional defense committees by March 1, 2020, on the lessons learned regarding the utilization of a fixed-price contract for development. Section 122—Modification of Limitation on Use of Funds for KC-46A Aircraft This section would amend section 146 of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (P.L. 115-232), to limit the use of funds for KC-46A aircraft pending submittal of certification, to include a military flight release. Senate The Senate Armed Services Committee, in its report accompanying S. 1790, recommended funding KC-46 procurement at $2,705.5 million, an increase of $471 million, for 15 aircraft. The committee recommended the requested amount for R&D. The report included the following language: Limitation on use of funds regarding the basing of KC–46A aircraft outside the continental United States (sec. 352) The committee recommends a provision that would limit Air Force funds until the Secretary of the Air Force submits to the Congress a report on the projected plan and timeline for strategic basing of the KC–46A aircraft outside the continental United States. Final Action Conference on the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act was in progress as of this report. FY2020 Defense Appropriations Act (H.R. 2968/S. 2474) House The House Appropriations Committee, in its report accompanying H.R. 2968, recommended funding KC-46A procurement at $2,198.5 million, a reduction of $36 million from the requested level, designated as “unit cost adjustment.” The committee recommended the requested amount for R&D. Senate The Senate Appropriations Committee, in its report accompanying S. 2474, recommended funding KC-46A procurement at $2,127.8 million, $106.8 million below the requested level. $48 million of the reduction was designated as “Restoring acquisition accountability: Unit cost growth,” $10.3 million as “Restoring acquisition accountability: WARP kits cost growth,” and $48.5 million as “Restoring acquisition accountability: Excess depot standup funding due to delivery delays.” The committee recommended $94.6 million in research and development funds, Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 16 $35 million above the requested amount, with the addition designated as “Program increase: Boom telescope actuator.” Final Action Final action on FY2020 appropriations was pending as of this report. Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service 17 Appendix A. Potential Longevity of KC-135 Fleet 2004 DSB Report and 2006 RAND Analysis A 2004 Defense Science Board (DSB) task force report examined, among other things, the potential longevity of the KC-135 fleet.50 The 2006 RAND Analysis of Alternatives (AOA) on aerial refueling also examined the technical condition of the KC-135 fleet. The DSB report stated that airframe service life, corrosion, and maintenance costs factors would potentially determine the KC-135s operational life expectancy. Each of these factors is discussed briefly below. Airframe Service Life KC-135s, along with their associated B-52 bombers, were originally purchased to give the United States a strategic nuclear strike capability. As a result, both fleets of airplanes spent a significant amount of time during the Cold War on ground alert. Consequently, in 2004, the average KC-135 airframe had flown only about 17,000 hours of an estimated service life of 36,000 hours (KC-135E) or 39,000 hours (KC-135R). On this basis, the DSB report concluded that KC-135 airframes were viable until 2040 at “current usage rates.”51 The 2006 RAND AOA similarly concluded that the KC-135 fleet “can operate into the 2040s,” but not without risks.52 Corrosion The 2004 DSB report concluded that corrosion did not pose an “imminent catastrophic threat to the KC-135 fleet” and that the Air Force’s maintenance practices were postured “to deal with corrosion and other aging problems,”53 but also stated: However, because the KC-135s are true first generation turbojet aircraft designed only 50 years from the time man first began to fly, concerns regarding the ability to continue operating these aircraft indefinitely are intuitively well founded.54 Maintenance Costs A 2004 GAO report stated that KC-135 flying hour costs increased in real (i.e., inflation-adjusted) terms by 29% between 1996 and 2002.55 The DSB report agreed that KC-135 maintenance costs had increased significantly, but found that they had leveled off due to Air Force changes in KC-135 depot processes. The DSB report forecasted modest growth in maintenance costs in the future.56 50 Defense Science Board Task Force Report on Aerial Refueling Requirements, May 2004, p. iv. 51 Ibid. 52 Michael Kennedy et al., Analysis of Alternatives (AoA) for KC-135 Recapitalization, Executive Summary, RAND Corporation, 2006, pp. 15-16. 53 Defense Science Board Task Force Report on Aerial Refueling Requirements, May 2004, p. iv. 54 Ibid., p. 17. 55 General Accounting Office, Military Aircraft[:] DOD needs to Determine Its Aerial Refueling Requirements, GAO-04-439, June 2004, p. 13. 56 Defense Science Board Task Force Report on Aerial Refueling Requirements, May 2004, pp. iv-v. Air Force KC-46A Pegasus Tanker Aircraft Program Congressional Research Service RL34398 · VERSION 48 · UPDATED 18 Risks of Flying Older Aircraft Some observers express about potential problems that may arise in flying 50- to 80-year-old tankers that could possibly ground the entire KC-135 fleet. The DSB report examined the issue and concluded that “although grounding is possible, the task force assesses the probability as no more likely than that of any other aircraft in the inventory of the Services.”57 The 2006 RAND analysis expressed a belief that it is possible that KC-135s will be able to operate into the 2040s, but the report expressed a lack of confidence that KC-135s could continue to be operated that long without risks of major maintenance cost increases, poor fleet availability, or possible fleet-wide grounding. The RAND analysis concluded that “the nation does not currently have sufficient knowledge about the state of the KC-135 fleet to project its technical condition over the next several decades with high confidence.”58 The analysis recommended more thorough scientific and technical study of the KC-135 to provide a more reliable basis for future assessments of the condition of the KC-135 fleet.59 Author Information Jeremiah Gertler Specialist in Military Aviation Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 57 Ibid., p. 18. 58 Michael Kennedy et al., “Analysis of Alternatives (AoA) for KC-135 Recapitalization, Executive Summary,” RAND Corporation, 2006, p. 16. 59 Ibid. 		2020-04-21T14:21:51-0400
Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Updated May 5, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov R42567 Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Summary The Coast Guard’s program of record (POR) calls for procuring 8 National Security Cutters (NSCs), 25 Offshore Patrol Cutters (OPCs), and 58 Fast Response Cutters (FRCs) as replacements for 90 aging Coast Guard high-endurance cutters, medium-endurance cutters, and patrol craft. The Coast Guard’s proposed FY2021 budget requests a total of $597 million in procurement funding for the NSC, OPC, and FRC programs. It also proposes a rescission of $70 million in FY2020 procurement funding that Congress provided for the NSC program. NSCs are the Coast Guard’s largest and most capable general-purpose cutters; they are replacing the Coast Guard’s 12 Hamilton-class high-endurance cutters. NSCs have an estimated average procurement cost of about $670 million per ship. Although the Coast Guard’s POR calls for procuring 8 NSCs to replace the 12 Hamilton-class cutters, Congress through FY2020 has fully funded 11 NSCs, including the 10th and 11th in FY2018. In FY2020, Congress provided $100.5 million for procurement of long lead time materials (LLTM) for a 12th NSC, so as to preserve the option of procuring a 12th NSC while the Coast Guard evaluates its future needs. The funding can be used for procuring LLTM for a 12th NSC if the Coast Guard determines it is needed. The Coast Guard’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $31 million in procurement funding for activities within the NSC program; this request does not include further funding for a 12th NSC. The Coast Guard’s proposed FY2021 budget also proposes a rescission of $70 million of the $100.5 million that Congress provided for a 12th NSC, with the intent of reprogramming that funding to the Coast Guard’s Polar Security Cutter (PSC) program. Eight NSCs have entered service; the seventh and eighth were commissioned into service on August 24, 2019. The 9th through 11th are under construction; the 9th is scheduled for delivery in 2020. OPCs are to be less expensive and in some respects less capable than NSCs; they are intended to replace the Coast Guard’s 29 aged medium-endurance cutters. Coast Guard officials describe the OPC and PSC programs as the service’s highest acquisition priorities. OPCs have an estimated average procurement cost of about $411 million per ship. The first OPC was funded in FY2018. The Coast Guard’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $546 million in procurement funding for the third OPC, LLTM for the fourth, and other program costs. On October 11, 2019, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), of which the Coast Guard is a part, announced that DHS had granted extraordinary contractual relief to Eastern Shipbuilding Group (ESG) of Panama City, FL, the builder of the first four OPCs, under P.L. 85-804 as amended (50 U.S.C. 1431-1435), a law that authorizes certain federal agencies to provide certain types of extraordinary relief to contractors who are encountering difficulties in the performance of federal contracts or subcontracts relating to national defense. ESG reportedly submitted a request for extraordinary relief on June 30, 2019, after ESG’s shipbuilding facilities were damaged by Hurricane Michael, which passed through the Florida panhandle on October 10, 2018. The Coast Guard intends to hold a competition for a contract to build OPCs 5 through 15. FRCs are considerably smaller and less expensive than OPCs; they are intended to replace the Coast Guard’s 49 aging Island-class patrol boats. FRCs have an estimated average procurement cost of about $65 million per boat. A total of 60 have been funded through FY2020, including four in FY2020. Six of the 60 are to be used by the Coast Guard in the Persian Gulf and are not counted against the Coast Guard’s 58-ship POR for the program, which relates to domestic operations. Excluding these six FRCs, 54 FRCs for domestic operations have been funded through FY2020. The 36th FRC was commissioned into service on January 10, 2020. The Coast Guard’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $20 million in procurement funding for the FRC program; this request does not include funding for any additional FRCs.Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Background ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Older Ships to Be Replaced by NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs .......................................................... 1 Missions of NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs ........................................................................................ 2 NSC Program ............................................................................................................................ 3 OPC Program ............................................................................................................................ 4 Overview ............................................................................................................................. 4 Competition and September 2016 Contract Award ............................................................. 7 October 2019 Announcement of Contractual Relief and Follow-on Competition .............. 8 January 10, 2020, RFP for Industry Studies ..................................................................... 10 March 20, 2020, Contract Awards for Industry Studies ..................................................... 11 Appendices with Additional Information .......................................................................... 12 FRC Program .......................................................................................................................... 12 Funding in FY2013-FY2021 Budget Submissions ................................................................. 13 Issues for Congress ........................................................................................................................ 14 Potential Impact of COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Situation ........................................................ 14 Procurement Funding for 12th NSC ......................................................................................... 15 Number of FRCs to Procure in FY2021 .................................................................................. 15 Procurement Cost Growth on OPCs 1 Through 4 ................................................................... 16 Contractual Relief and Follow-on Competition for OPC Program ......................................... 16 Overall Course of Action .................................................................................................. 16 Contractual Relief ............................................................................................................. 17 Follow-On Competition .................................................................................................... 18 Notional Schedule ............................................................................................................. 19 November 25, 2019, House Committee Letter Regarding OPC Program ........................ 19 Risk of Procurement Cost Growth on OPCs 5-25 ................................................................... 20 Annual OPC Procurement Rate............................................................................................... 20 Annual or Multiyear (Block Buy) Contracting for OPCs ....................................................... 21 Planned NSC, OPC, and FRC Procurement Quantities .......................................................... 22 Legislative Activity for FY2021 .................................................................................................... 22 Summary of Appropriations Action on FY2021 Procurement Funding Request .................... 22 Figures Figure 1. National Security Cutter ................................................................................................... 3 Figure 2. Offshore Patrol Cutter ...................................................................................................... 5 Figure 3. Offshore Patrol Cutter ...................................................................................................... 6 Figure 4. Offshore Patrol Cutter ...................................................................................................... 6 Figure 5. Offshore Patrol Cutter ...................................................................................................... 7 Figure 6. OPC Functional Design ................................................................................................... 9 Figure 7. Fast Response Cutter ...................................................................................................... 13 Figure A-1. Projected Mission Demands vs. Projected Capability/Performance .......................... 27 Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Tables Table 1. NSC, OPC, and FRC Funding in FY2013-FY2021 Budget Submissions ....................... 14 Table 2. Summary of Appropriations Action on FY2021 Procurement Funding Request ............ 22 Table A-1. Program of Record Compared to Objective Fleet Mix ................................................ 25 Table A-2. POR Compared to FMAs 1 Through 4 ........................................................................ 25 Table A-3. Force Mixes and Mission Performance Gaps .............................................................. 26 Table A-4. POR Compared to Objective Mixes in FMA Phases 1 and 2 ...................................... 28 Table B-1. Funding in PC&I Account in FY2013-FY2020 Budgets ............................................. 32 Appendixes Appendix A. Planned NSC, OPC, and FRC Procurement Quantities ........................................... 24 Appendix B. Funding Levels in PC&I Account ............................................................................ 31 Appendix C. Information on NSC, OPC, and FRC Programs from GAO Report ........................ 37 Appendix D. Some Considerations Relating to Warranties in Shipbuilding ................................. 40 Appendix E. Impact of Hurricane Michael on OPC Program at Eastern Shipbuilding................. 42 Appendix F. November 25, 2019, House Committee Letter Regarding OPC Program ................ 48 Contacts Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 50 Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction This report provides background information and potential oversight issues for Congress on the Coast Guard’s programs for procuring 8 National Security Cutters (NSCs), 25 Offshore Patrol Cutters (OPCs), and 58 Fast Response Cutters (FRCs). The Coast Guard’s proposed FY2021 budget requests a total of $597 million in procurement funding for the NSC, OPC, and FRC programs. The issue for Congress is whether to approve, reject, or modify the Coast Guard’s funding requests and acquisition strategies for the NSC, OPC, and FRC programs. Congress’s decisions on these three programs could substantially affect Coast Guard capabilities and funding requirements, and the U.S. shipbuilding industrial base. The NSC, OPC, and FRC programs have been subjects of congressional oversight for several years, and were previously covered in other CRS reports dating back to 1998 that are now archived.1 CRS testified on the Coast Guard’s cutter acquisition programs most recently in October and November of 2018.2 The Coast Guard’s plans for modernizing its fleet of polar icebreakers are covered in a separate CRS report.3 Background Older Ships to Be Replaced by NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs The 91 planned NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs are intended to replace 90 older Coast Guard ships—12 high-endurance cutters (WHECs), 29 medium-endurance cutters (WMECs), and 49 110-foot patrol craft (WPBs).4 The Coast Guard’s 12 Hamilton (WHEC-715) class high-endurance cutters entered service between 1967 and 1972.5 The Coast Guard’s 29 medium-endurance cutters included 13 Famous (WMEC-901) class ships that entered service between 1983 and 1991,6 14 1 This CRS report was first published on June 13, 2012. The earlier CRS reports were Coast Guard Deepwater Acquisition Programs: Background, Oversight Issues, and Options for Congress, by Ronald O’Rourke (first version December 18, 2006, final [i.e., archived] version January 20, 2012); CRS Report RS21019, Coast Guard Deepwater Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O’Rourke (first version September 25, 2001, final [i.e., archived] version December 8, 2006); and CRS Report 98-830 F, Coast Guard Integrated Deepwater System: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O’Rourke (first version October 5, 1998, final [i.e., archived] version June 1, 2001). From the late 1990s until 2007, the Coast Guard’s efforts to acquire NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs were parts of a larger, integrated Coast Guard acquisition effort aimed at acquiring several new types of cutters and aircraft that was called the Integrated Deepwater System (IDS) program, or Deepwater for short. In 2007, the Coast Guard broke up the Deepwater effort into a series of individual cutter and aircraft acquisition programs, but continued to use the term Deepwater as a shorthand way of referring collectively to these now-separated programs. In its FY2012 budget submission, the Coast Guard stopped using the term Deepwater as a way of referring to these programs. 2 See CRS Testimony TE10030, Icebreaker Acquisition and the Need for a National Maritime Strategy, by Ronald O'Rourke, November 29, 2018, which includes discussions of the NSC, OPC, and FRC programs in Appendix E, and CRS Testimony TE10029, Building the Fleets of the Future: Coast Guard and NOAA Fleet Recapitalization, by Ronald O'Rourke, October 11, 2018. 3 CRS Report RL34391, Coast Guard Polar Security Cutter (Polar Icebreaker) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 4 In the designations WHEC, WMEC, and WPB, W means Coast Guard ship, HEC stands for high-endurance cutter, MEC stands for medium-endurance cutter, and PB stands for patrol boat. 5 Hamilton-class cutters are 378 feet long and have a full load displacement of about 3,400 tons. 6 Famous-class cutters are 270 feet long and have a full load displacement of about 1,800 tons. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 2 Reliance (WMEC-615) class ships that entered service between 1964 and 1969,7 and 2 one-of-a-kind cutters that originally entered service with the Navy in 1944 and 1971 and were later transferred to the Coast Guard.8 The Coast Guard’s 49 110-foot Island (WPB-1301) class patrol boats entered service between 1986 and 1992.9 Many of these 90 ships are manpower-intensive and increasingly expensive to maintain, and have features that in some cases are not optimal for performing their assigned missions. Some of them have already been removed from Coast Guard service: 8 of the Island-class patrol boats were removed from service in 2007 following an unsuccessful effort to modernize and lengthen them to 123 feet; additional Island-class patrol boats are being decommissioned as new FRCs enter service; the one-of-a-kind medium-endurance cutter that originally entered service with the Navy in 1944 was decommissioned in 2011; and Hamilton-class cutters are being decommissioned as new NSCs enter service. A July 2012 Government Accountability Office (GAO) report discusses the generally poor physical condition and declining operational capacity of the Coast Guard’s older high-endurance cutters, medium-endurance cutters, and 110-foot patrol craft.10 Missions of NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs, like the ships they are intended to replace, are to be multimission ships for routinely performing 7 of the Coast Guard’s 11 statutory missions, including  search and rescue (SAR);  drug interdiction;  migrant interdiction;  ports, waterways, and coastal security (PWCS);  protection of living marine resources;  other/general law enforcement; and  defense readiness operations.11 Smaller Coast Guard patrol craft and boats contribute to the performance of some of these seven missions close to shore. NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs perform them both close to shore and in the deepwater environment, which generally refers to waters more than 50 miles from shore. 7 Reliance-class cutters are 210 feet long and have a full load displacement of about 1,100 tons. 8 These were the Acushnet (WMEC-167), which originally entered service with the Navy in 1944, and the Alex Haley (WMEC-39), which originally entered service with the Navy in 1971. The Acushnet served in the Navy from until 1946, when it was transferred to the Coast Guard. The ship was about 214 feet long and had a displacement of about 1,700 tons. The Alex Haley served in the Navy until 1996. It was transferred to the Coast Guard in 1997, converted into a cutter, and reentered service with the Coast Guard in 1999. It is 282 feet long and has a full load displacement of about 2,900 tons. 9 Island-class boats are 110 feet long and have a full load displacement of about 135 to 170 tons. 10 Government Accountability Office, Coast Guard[:]Legacy Vessels’ Declining Conditions Reinforce Need for More Realistic Operational Targets, GAO-12-741, July 2012, 71 pp. 11 The four statutory Coast Guard missions that are not to be routinely performed by NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs are marine safety, aids to navigation, marine environmental protection, and ice operations. These missions are performed primarily by other Coast Guard ships. The Coast Guard states, however, that “while [NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs] will not routinely conduct [the] Aids to Navigation, Marine Safety, or Marine Environmental Protection missions, they may periodically be called upon to support these missions (i.e., validate the position of an Aid to Navigation, transport personnel or serve as a Command and Control platform for a Marine Safety or Marine Environmental Response mission, etc.).” (Source: Coast Guard information paper provided to CRS on June 1, 2012.) Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 3 NSC Program National Security Cutters (Figure 1)—also known as Legend (WMSL-750)12 class cutters because they are being named for legendary Coast Guard personnel13—are the Coast Guard’s largest and most capable general-purpose cutters.14 They are larger and technologically more advanced than Hamilton-class cutters, and are built by Huntington Ingalls Industries’ Ingalls Shipbuilding of Pascagoula, MS (HII/Ingalls). Figure 1. National Security Cutter Source: U.S. Coast Guard photo accessed May 2, 2012, at http://www.flickr.com/photos/coast_guard/5617034780/sizes/l/in/set-72157629650794895/. 12 In the designation WMSL, W means Coast Guard ship and MSL stands for maritime security cutter, large. 13 For a Coast Guard news release that mentions the naming rule for the class, see U.S. Coast Guard, “Acquisition Update: Keel Authenticated for the Fifth National Security Cutter,” May 17, 2013. 14 The NSC design is 418 feet long and has a full load displacement of about 4,500 tons. The displacement of the NSC design is about equal to that of Navy’s now-retired Oliver Hazard Perry (FFG-7) class frigates, which were 453 feet long and had a full load displacement of about 4,200 tons. The Coast Guard’s three polar icebreakers are much larger than NSCs, but are designed for a more specialized role of operations in polar waters. The Coast Guard states that The largest and most technologically advanced of the Coast Guard’s newest classes of cutters, the NSCs replace the aging 378-foot high endurance cutters, which have been in service since the 1960s. Compared to legacy cutters, the NSCs’ design provides better sea-keeping and higher sustained transit speeds, greater endurance and range, and the ability to launch and recover small boats from astern, as well as aviation support facilities and a flight deck for helicopters and unmanned aerial vehicles. (“National Security Cutter,” accessed April 19, 2018, at https://www.dcms.uscg.mil/Our-Organization/Assistant-Commandant-for-Acquisitions-CG-9/Programs/Surface-Programs/National-Security-Cutter/.) Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 4 The Coast Guard’s acquisition program of record (POR)—the service’s list, established in 2004, of planned procurement quantities for various new types of ships and aircraft—calls for procuring 8 NSCs as replacements for the service’s 12 Hamilton-class high-endurance cutters. The Coast Guard’s FY2020 budget submission estimated the total acquisition cost of a nine-ship NSC program at $6.030 billion, or an average of about $670 million per ship.15 Although the Coast Guard’s POR calls for procuring 8 NSCs to replace the 12 Hamilton-class cutters, Congress through FY2020 has fully funded 11 NSCs, including the 10th and 11th in FY2018. In FY2020, Congress provided $100.5 million for procurement of long lead time materials (LLTM) for a 12th NSC, so as to preserve the option of procuring a 12th NSC while the Coast Guard evaluates its future needs. The funding can be used for procuring LLTM for a 12th NSC if the Coast Guard determines it is needed. The Coast Guard’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $31 million in procurement funding for activities within the NSC program; this request does not include further funding for a 12th NSC. The Coast Guard’s proposed FY2021 budget also proposes a rescission of $70 million of the $100.5 million that Congress provided for a 12th NSC, with the intent of reprogramming that funding to the Coast Guard’s Polar Security Cutter (PSC) program. The remaining $30.5 million would be used for procuring mission equipment for the 10th and 11th NSCs.16 Eight NSCs have entered service; the seventh and eighth were commissioned into service on August 24, 2019. The 9th through 11th are under construction; the 9th is scheduled for delivery in 2020. For additional information on the status and execution of the NSC program from a May 2018 GAO report, see Appendix C. OPC Program Overview Coast Guard officials describe the Offshore Patrol Cutter program and the Coast Guard’s Polar Security Cutter (PSC) program17 as the service’s two highest acquisition priorities. The Coast Guard’s POR calls for procuring 25 OPCs as replacements for the service’s 29 medium-endurance cutters. The first four ships in the OPC program are being built by Eastern Shipbuilding Group (ESG) of Panama City, FL. OPCs (Figure 2, Figure 3, Figure 4, Figure 5, and Figure 6)—also known as Heritage (WMSM-915)18 class cutters because they are being named for past cutters that played a significant role in the history of the Coast Guard and the Coast Guard’s predecessor organizations19—are to be less expensive and in some respects less capable than NSCs.20 OPCs 15 Source: Coast Guard Five-Year (FY2020-FY2024) Capital Investment Plan (CIP) funding table for the Procurement, Construction and Improvements (PC&I) account. 16 Source: Email from Coast Guard liaison office to CRS, February 26, 2020. 17 For more on the PSC proram, see CRS Report RL34391, Coast Guard Polar Security Cutter (Polar Icebreaker) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 18 In the designation WMSM, W means Coast Guard ship and MSM stands for maritime security cutter, medium. 19 For the naming rule for the class and a list of the names of the first 11 OPCs, see U.S. Coast Guard, “The Offshore Patrol Cutter (OPC) Is The Coast Guard’s Highest Investment Priority and Will Play A Critical Role in the Service’s Future,” undated, accessed August 15, 2017, at http://www.dcms.uscg.mil/Our-Organization/Assistant-Commandant-for-Acquisitions-CG-9/Newsroom/OPC_Day/. See also Sam LaGrone, “Coast Guard Celebrates Birthday by Naming 11 Planned Offshore Patrol Cutters,” USNI News, August 4, 2017 (updated August 5, 2017). 20 The service states that OPCs Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 5 are to have a length of 360 feet, which will make them about 86% as long as NSCs, which have a length of 418 feet. OPCs were earlier estimated to have a full load displacement of 3,500 tons to 3,730 tons, which would have made them about 80% as large in terms of full load displacement as NSCs, which have a full load displacement of about 4,500 tons21 As the OPC design has matured, however, its estimated displacement has grown to about 4,500 tons, making it essentially as large as the NSC in terms of full load displacement.22 Figure 2. Offshore Patrol Cutter Artist’s rendering Source: Photograph accompanying Kirk Moore, “Coast Guard’s Birthday Present: Naming the Next Cutters,” WorkBoat, August 4, 2017. A caption to the rendering credits the rendering to Eastern Shipbuilding Group. The OPCs will provide the majority of offshore presence for the Coast Guard’s cutter fleet, bridging the capabilities of the 418-foot national security cutters, which patrol the open ocean, and the 154-foot fast response cutters, which serve closer to shore. The OPCs will conduct missions including law enforcement, drug and migrant interdiction, search and rescue, and other homeland security and defense operations. Each OPC will be capable of deploying independently or as part of task groups and serving as a mobile command and control platform for surge operations such as hurricane response, mass migration incidents and other events. The cutters will also support Arctic objectives by helping regulate and protect emerging commerce and energy exploration in Alaska. (“Offshore Patrol Cutter,” accessed April 20, 2018, https://www.dcms.uscg.mil/Our-Organization/Assistant-Commandant-for-Acquisitions-CG-9/Programs/Surface-Programs/Offshore-Patrol-Cutter/Offshore-Patrol-Cutter-Program-Profile/.) 21 As of May 26, 2017, the OPC’s light ship displacement (i.e., its “empty” displacement, without fuel, water, ballast, stores, and crew) was preliminarily estimated at about 2,640 to 2,800 tons, and its full load displacement was preliminarily estimated at about 3,500 to 3,730 tons. (Source: Figures provided to CRS by Cost Guard liaison office, May 26, 2017.) In terms of full load displacement, this would have made OPCs roughly 80% as large as NSCs. 22 Source: Email from Coast Guard liaison office to CRS, November 25, 2019. See also Figure 6. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 6 Figure 3. Offshore Patrol Cutter Artist’s rendering Source: “Offshore Patrol Cutter Notional Design Characteristics and Performance,” accessed September 16, 2016, at https://www.dcms.uscg.mil/Portals/10/CG-9/Surface/OPC/OPC%20Placemat%2036x24.pdf?ver=2018-10-02-134225-297. Figure 4. Offshore Patrol Cutter Artist’s rendering Source: Eastern Shipbuilding Group (http://www.easternshipbuilding.com/), accessed September 9, 2019. The Coast Guard’s FY2020 budget submission estimated the total acquisition cost of the 25 ships at $10.270 billion, or an average of about $411 million per ship.23 The first OPC was funded in FY2018. The Coast Guard’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $546 million in procurement funding for the third OPC, LLTM for the fourth, and other program costs. 23 Source: Coast Guard Five-Year (FY2020-FY2024) Capital Investment Plan (CIP) funding table for the Procurement, Construction and Improvements (PC&I) account. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 7 Figure 5. Offshore Patrol Cutter Artist’s rendering Source: Image received from Coast Guard liaison office, May 25, 2017. The Coast Guard’s Request for Proposal (RFP) for the OPC program, released on September 25, 2012, established an affordability requirement for the program of an average unit price of $310 million per ship, or less, in then-year dollars (i.e., dollars that are not adjusted for inflation) for ships 4 through 9 in the program.24 This figure represents the shipbuilder’s portion of the total cost of the ship; it does not include the cost of government-furnished equipment (GFE) on the ship,25 or other program costs—such as those for program management, system integration, and logistics—that contribute to the above-cited figure of $411 million per ship.26 Competition and September 2016 Contract Award In response to the September 25, 2012, RFP, at least eight shipyards expressed interest in the OPC program.27 On February 11, 2014, the Coast Guard announced that it had awarded Preliminary 24 Source: Section C.5 of the RFP, accessed October 31, 2012, at http://www.uscg.mil/ACQUISITION/newsroom/updates/opc092512.asp. 25 GFE is equipment that the government procures and then delivers to the shipyard for installation on the ship. 26 Source: Coast Guard emails to CRS dated June 25, 2013. 27 The firms were the following: Bollinger Shipyards of Lockport, LA; Eastern Shipbuilding Group of Panama City, FL; General Dynamics Bath Iron Works (GD/BIW) of Bath, ME; Huntington Ingalls Industries (HII) of Pascagoula, MS; Marinette Marine Corporation of Marinette, WS; General Dynamics National Steel and Shipbuilding Company (GD/NASSCO) of San Diego, CA; Vigor Shipyards of Seattle, WA; and VT Halter Marine of Pascagoula, MS. (Source: U. S. Coast Guard Offshore Patrol Cutter (OPC) List of Interested Contractors Updated July 2012, accessed online October 23, 2012, at http://www.uscg.mil/ACQUISITION/opc/pdf/companiesinterested.pdf; and Kevin Brancato and Anne Laurent, Coast Guard’s $12 Billion Cutter Competition Spurs Eight Shipyards to Dive In, Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 8 and Contract Design (P&CD) contracts to three of those eight firms—Bollinger Shipyards of Lockport, LA; Eastern Shipbuilding Group (ESG) of Panama City, FL; and General Dynamics’ Bath Iron Works (GD/BIW) of Bath, ME.28 On September 15, 2016, the Coast Guard announced that it had awarded the detail design and construction (DD&C) contract to ESG. The contract covered detail design and production of up to 9 OPCs and had a potential value of $2.38 billion if all options were exercised.29 October 2019 Announcement of Contractual Relief and Follow-on Competition On October 11, 2019, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), of which the Coast Guard is a part, announced that DHS had granted extraordinary contractual relief to ESG under P.L. 85-804 as amended (50 U.S.C. 1431-1435), a law originally enacted in 1958 that authorizes certain federal agencies to provide certain types of extraordinary relief to contractors who are encountering difficulties in the performance of federal contracts or subcontracts relating to national defense.30 Bloomberg Government Study, November 8, 2012, 6 pp. The Coast Guard document states that these firms “expressed interest in the Offshore Patrol Cutter acquisition and have agreed to their names provided on the Coast Guard website.” See also Stew Magnuson, “New Coast Guard Cutter Sparks Fierce Competition Among Shipbuilders,” National Defense (www.nationaldefensemagazine.org), April 2013, accessed March 26, 2013, at http://www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/articles/2013/4/1/2013april-new-coast-guard-cutter-sparks-fierce-competition-among-shipbuilders.) 28 “Acquisition Update: U.S. Coast Guard Awards Three Contracts for Offshore Patrol Cutter Preliminary and Contract Design,” February 11, 2014, accessed February 14, 2014, at https://www.dcms.uscg.mil/Portals/10/CG-9/Newsroom/In%20The%20News%20Archives/2014/opc021114.pdf?ver=2017-05-23-145011-727. HII and VT Halter Marine reportedly filed protests of the Coast Guard’s award decision on February 24 and 25, respectively. The Coast Guard issued stop work orders to Bollinger, Eastern, and GD/BIW pending GAO’s rulings on the protests. (Calvin Biesecker, “Coast Guard Issues Stop Work Orders On OPC Following Protests,” Defense Daily, February 28, 2014: 2-3. See also Christopher P. Cavas, “Ingalls Protesting US Coast Guard Cutter Contract,” DefenseNews.com, February 26, 2014.) On June 5, 2014, it was reported that GAO had rejected the protests, and that the Coast Guard had directed Bollinger, Eastern, and GD/BIW to resume their work. (Calvin Biesecker, “Coast Guard Directs Design Work Continue On OPC After GAO Denies Protests,” Defense Daily, June 5, 2014: 1; Christopher P. Cavas, “US Coast Guard Cutter Award Upheld,” Defense News (http://www.defensenews.com), June 5, 2014. For the text of the decision, see Government Accountability Office, Decision in the Matter of Huntington Ingalls Industries, Inc.; VT Halter Marine, Inc., June 2, 2014.) 29 “Acquisition Update: Coast Guard Selects Offshore Patrol Cutter Design,” September 15, 2016; “Acquisition Update: Coast Guard Moves Forward To Next Phase Of OPC Acquisition,” October 5, 2016. See also “Coast Guard Exercises Long Lead Time Materials Option For First Offshore Patrol Cutter,” September 7, 2017. 30 50 U.S.C. 1431 states in part The President may authorize any department or agency of the Government which exercises functions in connection with the national defense, acting in accordance with regulations prescribed by the President for the protection of the Government, to enter into contracts or into amendments or modifications of contracts heretofore or hereafter made and to make advance payments thereon, without regard to other provisions of law relating to the making, performance, amendment, or modification of contracts, whenever he deems that such action would facilitate the national defense. The authority conferred by this section shall not be utilized to obligate the United States in an amount in excess of $50,000 without approval by an official at or above the level of an Assistant Secretary or his Deputy, or an assistant head or his deputy, of such department or agency, or by a Contract Adjustment Board established therein. For more on P.L. 85-804 as amended, see CRS Report 76-261, Extraordinary Contractual Relief Under Public Law 85-804, April 28, 1976, by Andrew C. Mayer. The report was prepared at the request of the House Armed Services Committee and converted by the committee into a committee print (70-905 O), dated May 10, 1976, that can be viewed at https://ufdc.ufl.edu/AA00022546/00001/1j. See also David H. Peirez, “Public Law 85-804: Contractual Relief for the Government Contractor,” Administrative Law Review, Vol. 16 (Summer 1964): 248-264, accessed October 11, 2019, at Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 9 Figure 6. OPC Functional Design “Placemat” summary from Coast Guard Source: Slide 11 from Coast Guard presentation at OPC Industry Day, December 11, 2019, updated December 13, 2019, accessed December 17, 2019, at https://beta.sam.gov/opp/bf0b9b0a1fe2428e9a73043259641c13/view. ESG reportedly submitted a request for extraordinary relief on June 30, 2019, after ESG’s shipbuilding facilities were damaged by Hurricane Michael, which passed through the Florida panhandle on October 10, 2018. The Coast Guard announced that the contractual relief is limited to the first four hulls in the OPC program. DHS stated that the Coast Guard would immediately transition to conducting a follow-on competition for subsequent ships in the OPC program,31 identified later as ships 5 through 15 in the program. Under P.L. 85-804 as amended, Congress had 60 days of continuous session to review the announced contractual relief, with the 60-day period in this case starting October 11.32 https://www.jstor.org/stable/40708469; and “Presidential Power: Public Law 85-804 (50 U.S.C. §§ 1431-35),” Brennan Center for Justice, undated, accessed October 11, 2019, at https://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/analysis/50%20USC%201431-1435.pdf. (Although it is undated, it appears to have been written no earlier than 2014, as it includes three references to the year 2014, including one that states, “As of 2014….”) The text of P.L. 85-804 as originally enacted is posted at https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-72/pdf/STATUTE-72-Pg972.pdf. 31 Department of Homeland Security, “DHS Extends Contract Relief for Offshore Patrol Cutter,” October 11, 2019; U.S. Coast Guard, “Department of Homeland Security Approves Limited Extraordinary Relief for Offshore Patrol Cutter Contract,” October 11, 2019; “DHS, Coast Guard Extend Limited Contract Relief for Offshore Patrol Cutter,” Coast Guard News (coastguardnews.com), October 11, 2019. 32 50 U.S.C. 1431 states in part Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 10 January 10, 2020, RFP for Industry Studies On January 10, 2020, the Coast Guard released a request for proposals (RFP) for industry studies in connection with its intended follow-on competition for ships 5 through 15 in the OPC program. Responses to the RFP were due by January 31, 2020. The RFP posting included an attached notional timeline for the follow-on effort. Under this notional timeline, the contracts for industry studies were to be awarded in early March 2020 (they were awarded on March 20—see next section), and the studies are to be completed by October 10, 2020. A draft RFP for the detail design and construction (DD&C) contract for ships 5 through 15 is to be released around July 31, 2020; the final RFP is to be released around October 10, 2020; and proposals under the RFP are to be submitted by a date late in the third quarter of FY2021. Under the Coast Guard’s notional timeline, the DD&C contract is to be awarded on January 30, 2022. Ships 1 through 7 in the 25-ship program are to be built at a rate of one per year, with OPC-1 completing construction in FY2022 and OPC-7 completing construction in FY2028. The remaining 18 ships are to be built at a rate of two per year, with OPC-8 completing construction in FY2029 and OPC-25 completing construction in FY2038. These dates are generally 10 months to about 2 years later than they would have been under the Coast Guard’s previous (i.e., pre-October 11, 2019) timeline for the OPC program.33 Under the new notional timeline, the Coast Guard’s 14 Reliance-class 210-foot medium-endurance cutters would be replaced when they would be (if still in service) about 54 to 67 years old, and the Coast Guard’s 13 Famous-class 270-foot medium-endurance cutters would be replaced when they would be (if still in service) about 42 to 52 years old.34 The authority conferred by this section may not be utilized to obligate the United States in any amount in excess of $25,000,000 unless the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of Representatives have been notified in writing of such proposed obligation and 60 days of continuous session of Congress have expired following the date on which such notice was transmitted to such Committees. For purposes of this section, the continuity of a session of Congress is broken only by an adjournment of the Congress sine die at the end of a Congress, and the days on which either House is not in session because of an adjournment of more than 3 days to a day certain, or because of an adjournment sine die other than at the end of a Congress, are excluded in the computation of such 60-day period 33 Source for ships 1-4: An October 15, 2019, press report states Under the new plan, the Coast Guard intends for Eastern Shipbuilding Group (ESG) to build up to four OPCs rather than the minimum of nine contracted for a year ago, with the first ship now delayed 10 to 12 months and the three subsequent ships about nine to 10 months each from that point, Shultz said at an event hosted by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. Delivery of the first OPC, which began construction in January, has been pushed back to 2022. (Cal Biesecker, “Decision To Reopen OPC Competition Will Stretch Out Acquisition,” Defense Daily, October 15, 2019. See also Gina Harkins, “Despite Hurricane Damage, Coast Guard Pressing On with Next-Gen Cutter Construction,” Military.com, October 15, 2019; Ben Werner, “Coast Guard Seeks To Bring Bidders Onto Modified Offshore Patrol Cutter Contract,” USNI News, October 15, 2019.) Source for ships 5 through 25: CRS comparison of notional timeline’s completion dates with those shown in Figure 4 on page 17 of Government Accountability Office, Coast Guard Recapitalization[:] Matching Needs and Resources Continue to Strain Acquisition Efforts, GAO-17-654 T, June 7, 2017. (Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation, Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, House of Representatives, Statement of Marie A. Mak, Director, Acquisition and Sourcing Management.) 34 Source: CRS estimate based on replacement sequence shown in Government Accountability Office, Coast Guard Recapitalization[:] Matching Needs and Resources Continue to Strain Acquisition Efforts, GAO-17-654 T, June 7, Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 11 An October 18, 2019, Coast request for information (RFI) for the follow-on effort stated that “it is assumed that Shipbuilders would utilize the mature parts of the existing OPC functional design—to the maximum extent possible—and mature any incomplete aspects of the [OPC] detail design.” This suggests that the Coast Guard envisioned that the fifth and subsequent OPCs would be built to a design that is largely similar to that of ESG’s design for the first four OPCs. March 20, 2020, Contract Awards for Industry Studies On March 20, 2020, the Coast Guard announced that it had awarded nine industry study contracts in support of the follow-on competition for the OPC program. The contracts were awarded to  Austal USA of Mobile, AL;  General Dynamics/Bath Iron Works (GD/BIW) of Bath, ME;  Bollinger Shipyards Lockport of Lockport, LA;  Eastern Shipbuilding Group (ESG) of Panama City, FL;  Fincantieri Marinette Marine (F/MM) of Marinette, WS;  General Dynamics/National Steel and Shipbuilding Company (GD/NASSCO) of San Diego, CA;  Huntington Ingalls Industries/Ingalls Shipbuilding (HII/Ingalls) of Pascagoula, MS:  Philly Shipyard of Philadelphia, PA;  VT Halter Marine Inc. of Pascagoula, MS. Most of the contracts have a base award value of $2.0 million and a total potential value of $3.0 million. The exceptions are the contract awarded to ESG, which has a base award value of $1.1 million and a total potential value of $1.2 million (a difference that appears to reflect ESG’s status as the builder of the first OPCs), and the contract awarded to VT Halter, which has a total potential value of $2.9 million. The Coast Guard stated in its contract-award announcement that Under their respective contracts, the awardees will assess OPC design and technical data, provided by the Coast Guard, and the program’s construction approach. Based on their analyses, the awardees will recommend to the Coast Guard potential strategies and approaches for the follow-on detail design and construction (DD&C). The awardees will also discuss how they would prepare the OPC functional design for production. The awardees may also identify possible design or systems revisions that would be advantageous to the program if implemented, with strategies to ensure those revisions are properly managed. The Coast Guard will use the industry studies results to further inform its follow-on acquisition strategy and promote a robust competitive environment for the DD&C award. Participation in industry studies is not a pre-requisite for submitting a DD&C proposal.35 2017. (Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation, Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, House of Representatives, Statement of Marie A. Mak, Director, Acquisition and Sourcing Management.) 35 U.S. Coast Guard, “Coast Guard Awards Nine Contracts for Offshore Patrol Cutter Industry Studies,” March 20, 2020. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 12 Appendices with Additional Information For additional general information on the status and execution of the OPC program from a May 2018 GAO report, see Appendix C. For additional background information on the impact of Hurricane Michael on the OPC program at ESG, see Appendix E. For the text of a November 25, 2019, letter to the Acting Secretary of DHS from the Chair and Ranking Member of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee and the Chair and Ranking Member of that committee’s Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation subcommittee regarding the restructuring of the OPC program under P.L. 85-804, see Appendix F. FRC Program Fast Response Cutters (Figure 7)—also called Sentinel (WPC-1101)36 class patrol boats because they are being named for enlisted leaders, trailblazers, and heroes of the Coast Guard and its predecessor services of the U.S. Revenue Cutter Service, U.S. Lifesaving Service, and U.S. Lighthouse Service37—are considerably smaller and less expensive than OPCs, but are larger than the Coast Guard’s older patrol boats.38 FRCs are built by Bollinger Shipyards of Lockport, LA. The Coast Guard’s POR calls for procuring 58 FRCs as replacements for the service’s 49 Island-class patrol boats.39 The POR figure of 58 FRCs is for domestic operations. The Coast Guard, however, operates six Island-class patrol boats in the Persian Gulf area as elements of a Bahrain-based Coast Guard unit, called Patrol Forces Southwest Asia (PATFORSWA), which is the Coast Guard’s largest unit outside the United States.40 Providing FRCs as one-for-one replacements for all six of the Island-class patrol boats in PATFORSWA would result in a combined POR+PATFORSWA figure of 64 FRCs. 36 In the designation WPC, W means Coast Guard ship and PC stands for patrol craft. 37 Source for class naming rule: U.S. Coast Guard bulletin, “ALCOAST 349/17 - Nov 2017 New Fast Response Cutters Named for Coast Guard heroes,” November 22, 2017, accessed November 20, 2017, at https://content.govdelivery.com/accounts/USDHSCG/bulletins/1c6c844. 38 FRCs are 154 feet long and have a full load displacement of 353 tons. 39 The Coast Guard states that The planned fleet of FRCs will conduct primarily the same missions as the 110’ patrol boats being replaced. In addition, the FRC will have several increased capabilities enhancing overall mission execution. The FRC is designed for rapid response, with approximately a 28 knot speed capability, and will typically operate in the coastal zones. Examples of missions that FRCs will complete include SAR, Migrant Interdiction, Drug Interdiction and Ports Waterways and Coastal Security. FRCs will provide enhanced capabilities over the 110’s including improved C4ISR capability and interoperability; stern launch and recovery (up through sea state 4) of a 40 knot, Over-the-Horizon, 7m cutter boat; a remote operated, gyro stabilized MK38 Mod 2, 25mm main gun; improved sea keeping; and enhanced crew habitability. (Department of Homeland Security, United States Coast Guard, Fiscal Year 2013 Congressional Justification, p. CG-AC&I-28 (pdf page 182 of 400).) 40 For additional information on PATFORSWA, see U.S. Coast Guard, “Patrol Forces Southwest Asia, PATFORSWA,” accessed April 24, 2019, at https://www.atlanticarea.uscg.mil/Our-Organization/Area-Units/PATFORSWA/, U.S. Coast Guard, “CG Patrol Forces SWA Org Chart,” accessed April 24, 2019, at https://www.atlanticarea.uscg.mil/Our-Organization/Area-Units/PATFORSWA/Departments/; Edward H. Lundquist, “PATFORSWA Serves Forward in the Arabian Gulf,” Defense Media Network, March 19, 2018; Eric D. Nielsen (posted by Connie Terrell), “PATFORSWA: Guardians of the Arabian Gulf,” Coast Guard Compass, August 22, 2016. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 13 Figure 7. Fast Response Cutter With an older Island-class patrol boat behind Source: U.S. Coast Guard photo accessed May 4, 2012, at http://www.flickr.com/photos/coast_guard/6871815460/sizes/l/in/set-72157629286167596/. The Coast Guard’s FY2020 budget submission estimated the total acquisition cost of the 58 cutters at $3.748.1 billion, or an average of about $65 million per cutter.41 A total of 60 have been funded through FY2020, including four in FY2020. Six of the 60 are to be used by the Coast Guard in the Persian Gulf and are not counted against the Coast Guard’s 58-ship POR for the program, which relates to domestic operations. Excluding these six FRCs, 54 FRCs for domestic operations have been funded through FY2020. The 36th FRC was commissioned into service on January 10, 2020. The 37th and 38th were accepted by the Coast Guard on February 7 and April 2, 2020, respectively. The Coast Guard’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $20 million in procurement funding for the FRC program; this request does not include funding for any additional FRCs. For additional information on the status and execution of the FRC program from a May 2018 GAO report, see Appendix C. Funding in FY2013-FY2021 Budget Submissions Table 1 shows annual requested and programmed acquisition funding for the NSC, OPC, and FRC programs in the Coast Guard’s FY2013-FY2021 budget submissions. Actual appropriated figures differ from these requested and projected amounts. 41 Source: Coast Guard Five-Year (FY2020-FY2024) Capital Investment Plan (CIP) funding table for the Procurement, Construction and Improvements (PC&I) account. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 14 Table 1. NSC, OPC, and FRC Funding in FY2013-FY2021 Budget Submissions Figures in millions of then-year dollars Budget FY13 FY14 FY15 FY16 FY17 FY18 FY19 FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24 FY25 NSC program FY13 683 0 0 0 0 FY14 16 710 38 0 45 FY15 638 75 130 30 47 FY16 91.4 132 95 30 15 FY17 127 95 65 65 21 FY18 54 65 65 21 6.6 FY19 65 57.7 21 6.6 0 FY20 60 21 6.6 5 5 FY21 31 n/a n/a n/a n/a OPC program FY13 30 50 40 200 530 FY14 25 65 200 530 430 FY15 20 90 100 530 430 FY16 18.5 100 530 430 430 FY17 100 530 430 530 770 FY18 500 400 457 716 700 FY19 400 457 716 700 689 FY20 457 716 700 689 715 FY21 546 n/a n/a n/a n/a FRC program FY13 139 360 360 360 360 FY14 75 110 110 110 110 FY15 110 340 220 220 315 FY16 340 325 240 240 325 FY17 240 240 325 325 18 FY18 240 335 335 26 18 FY19 240 340 20 20 20 FY20 140 20 20 20 20 FY21 20 n/a n/a n/a n/a Total FY13 852 410 400 560 890 FY14 716 885 348 640 585 FY15 768 505 450 780 792 FY16 449.9 557 865 700 370 FY17 467 865 820 920 809 FY18 794 800 857 763 724.6 FY19 705 854.7 757 726.6 709 FY20 657 757 726.6 714 740 FY21 597 n/a n/a n/a n/a Source: Table prepared by CRS based on FY2013-FY2021 budget submissions. n/a means not available. Issues for Congress Potential Impact of COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Situation One issue for Congress concerns the potential impact of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation on the execution of U.S. military shipbuilding programs, including the ones discussed in this report. For additional discussion of this issue, see CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 15 Procurement Funding for 12th NSC Another issue for Congress concerns procurement funding for a 12th NSC—whether to approve, reject, or modify the Coast Guard’s proposed rescission of $70 million of the $101.5 million in FY2020 procurement funding that Congress provided for purchasing LLTM for a 12th NSC (with the intent of reprogramming that $70 million to the PSC program), and whether to provide any further procurement funding in FY2021 for a 12th NSC. Both of these questions relate to the issue of whether to procure a 12th NSC. Supporters of procuring a 12th NSC could argue that a total of 12 NSCs would provide one-for-one replacements for the 12 retiring Hamilton-class cutters; that Coast Guard analyses showing a need for no more than 9 NSCs assumed dual crewing of NSCs—something that has not worked as well as expected; that the Coast Guard’s POR record includes only about 61% as many new cutters as the Coast Guard has calculated would be required to fully perform the Coast Guard’s anticipated missions in coming years;42 that the Coast Guard has recently begun to place more emphasis on deploying cutters the Western Pacific—an action that could increase demands for NSCs beyond what the Coast Guard anticipated when it established its program of record in 2004; and that the increase in the estimated displacement of the OPC to 4,500 tons—a figure about equal to the displacement of NSCs—makes procuring additional NSCs more suitable as a near-term measure for responding to potential delays in the restructured OPC program. Skeptics or opponents of procuring a 12th NSC could argue that the Coast Guard’s POR includes only 8 NSCs; that the Coast Guard’s fleet mix analyses (see Appendix A) have not shown a potential need for more than 9 NSCs; that the Coast Guard intends to move expeditiously to proceed with its restructured effort to procure OPCs; and that in a situation of finite Coast Guard budgets, procuring a 12th NSC might reduce funding available for other Coast Guard programs, including the PSC program. Number of FRCs to Procure in FY2021 Another issue for Congress concerns whether to approve the Coast Guard’s proposal to procure no FRCs in FY2021, or instead procure some number of FRCs, such as two (which would be enough to either complete the program of record’s goal of 58 FRCs for domestic operations, or to provide one-for-one replacements for all six of the Island-class patrol boats that the Coast Guard operates in the Persian Gulf), or four (which would be enough to do both of these things). Supporters of the Coast Guard’s proposal to procure no FRCs in FY2021 could argue that in a situation of finite Coast Guard funding, procuring additional FRCS in FY2021 could reduce funding for other Coast Guard programs, including the OPC and PSC programs, and that even if no FRCs are procured in FY2021, additional FRCs could still be procured in FY2022 or subsequent years. Supporters of procuring two or four (or some other number of) FRCs in FY2021 could argue that this could complete the FRC’s 58-shp program of record goal for domestic use, and/or replace all six of the Coast Guard’s Island-class patrol boats in the Persian Gulf. They could argue that waiting until FY2022 or a subsequent fiscal year to procure these FRCs would increase their cost by creating a break in the shipyard’s production learning curve for building the boats and incurring other program stop-and-restart costs. 42 See “Planned NSC, OPC, and FRC Procurement Quantities” below, as well as Appendix A. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 16 Procurement Cost Growth on OPCs 1 Through 4 Another potential oversight issue for Congress concerns an increase in the estimated procurement cost of OPCs 1 through 4, and what implications, if any, this cost growth might have regarding the cost-effectiveness of building each of these four cutters. The Coast Guard states that as of mid-April 2020, the combined estimated procurement cost of OPCs 1 through 4 had increased by a total of between $300 million and $400 million since the Coast Guard’s 2017 Life Cycle Cost Estimate (LCCE) for the program, with the increase on the cost OPC-1 being larger than the increases on the costs of OPCs 2 through 4, and that almost all of the increase is attributable to relief provided under P.L. 85-804.43 A combined increase of $300 million to $400 million for OPCS 1 through 4 would represent an increase of 18% to 24% above the $411 million average procurement cost for each of 25 OPCs as estimated under the Coast Guard’s FY2020 budget submission. Potential oversight questions for Congress include the following:  Of the increase of $300 million to $400 million in the combined estimated procurement cost of OPCs 1 through 4, how much was due to the effects of Hurricane Michael?  How cost-effective would it be to build each of these first four OPCs at their new estimated procurement costs, relative to potential alternatives such as procuring up to four additional NSCs, or up to four more of the OPCs that are to be built under the follow-on OPC construction contract that the Coast Guard intends to compete and award?  What potential, if any, is there for further cost growth on OPCs 1 through 4?  At what procurement cost would one or more of these first four OPCs no longer be cost effective to procure, relative to the potential alternatives mentioned above? Contractual Relief and Follow-on Competition for OPC Program More generally, the Coast Guard’s proposed course of action for the OPC program raises a number of potential oversight questions for Congress, including those below. Overall Course of Action Potential oversight questions relating to the announced overall course of action include but are not necessarily limited to the following:  What potential overall courses of action did DHS and the Coast Guard examine for responding to the situation at ESG created by Hurricane Michael? For example, did DHS and the Coast Guard examine the option of immediately terminating the OPC contract, paying ESG any resulting contract-termination costs, and conducting a new competition to build OPCs starting with the first ship in the program? Alternatively, for example, did DHS and the Coast Guard examine the option of providing contractual relief to ESG under P.L. 85-804 as amended while maintaining the plan to build up to nine OPCs at ESG? What other potential overall courses of action were examined? 43 Source: Coast Guard email to CRS, April 15, 2020. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 17  What were the potential advantages and disadvantages of these and other potential overall courses of action?  Why does DHS believe that the best overall course of action is to provide extraordinary contractual relief for a limited number of OPCs under P.L. 85-804 as amended and then conduct a follow-on competition for the remaining ships in the OPC program?  What impact, if any, does the announced overall course of action for the OPC program have on the issue discussed in the next section regarding funding for a 12th National Security Cutter (NSC)? Contractual Relief Potential oversight questions relating to specifically the contractual relief include but are not necessarily limited to the following:  Why is ESG being granted financial and other contractual relief as a consequence of hurricane damage, when hurricanes are a known risk for communities on the Gulf Coast? Did ESG have insurance covering hurricane damage? If so, how much coverage did ESG have, and what payments did the insurance firm make to ESG? If ESG did not have insurance covering hurricane damage, why not?  Following Hurricane Katrina in 2005, Congress provided $1.7 billion in reallocated emergency supplemental appropriations to pay estimated higher shipbuilding costs for 11 Navy ships under construction at the Ingalls shipyard in Pascagoula, MS, and the Avondale shipyard upriver from New Orleans, LA.44 In what ways is that relief similar to or different from the relief being provided to ESG under P.L. 85-804 following Hurricane Michael? If financial relief for hurricane damage was provided to the Ingalls and Avondale shipyards, why should it not also be provided to ESG? By providing relief to Gulf Coast shipyards for hurricane damage, is the government creating a moral hazard that encourages Gulf Coast shipyards to reduce the amount of insurance coverage they purchase for hurricane damage, and if so, how if at all does that affect the prices they are able bid in competitions against shipyards located in other parts of the country?  Why does the contractual relief extend to four OPCs, as opposed to a smaller or greater number of OPCs? 44 See CRS Report RS22239, Emergency Supplemental Appropriations for Hurricane Katrina Relief, by Keith Bea, August 22, 2006, p. 6. The report states Citing the need for “special oversight” of these shipbuilding funds dedicated to cover property damage, cleanup, idle payroll, and business disruption (that may also be covered by shipbuilders’ insurance), the appropriators added report language requiring that the Navy or Army, as applicable, submit a report to the Appropriations Committees “certifying” that the costs were related to the hurricanes and would not be paid for by FEMA or the shipbuilders’ insurers. (U.S. House, Conference Committees 2005, Making Appropriations for the Department of Defense for the Fiscal Year Ending September 30, 2006, and for Other Purposes, conference report to accompany H.R. 2863, H.Rept. 109-359, 109th Cong., 1st sess. (Washington: GPO, 2005), p. 496.) See also CRS Report RL33298, FY2006 Supplemental Appropriations: Iraq and Other International Activities; Additional Hurricane Katrina Relief, Paul M. Irwin, Coordinator, Larry Nowels, Coordinator, June 15, 2006, pp. 59-66; and CRS Report RL33197, Reallocation of Hurricane Katrina Emergency Appropriations: Defense and Other Issues, Coordinated by Amy Belasco, December 15, 2005, pp. 9-14. (These CRS reports are out of print and available for congressional clients from the author of this report.) Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 18  What is the dollar value of the contractual relief? As mentioned earlier, letter to the Acting Secretary of DHS from the Chair and Ranking Member of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee and the Chair and Ranking Member of that committee’s Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation subcommittee regarding the OPC program (see Appendix F) states that under the Coast Guard’s plan for providing contractual relief under P.L. 85-804, DHS and the Coast Guard plan to “spend up to an additional $659 million to complete those [four] cutters….” Is this figure is correct? How was it calculated? Follow-On Competition Potential oversight questions relating specifically to the follow-on competition for OPCs 5 through 15 include but are not necessarily limited to the following:  If a follow-on competition is conducted for building ships 5 through 15 in the OPC program, how much of a production learning curve advantage would ESG have as a result of having some amount of production learning curve experience in building its OPC design?  As mentioned earlier, the Coast Guard envisions that OPCs 5 through 15 would be built to a design that is largely similar to that of ESG’s design for the first four OPCs.45 What are the potential advantages and disadvantages of this approach compared to an approach under which bidders would be permitted to submit bids for building their own OPC designs? What actions, if any, are needed for the government to secure from ESG any design data rights that might be needed to conduct a competition limited to ESG’s OPC design?  If OPCs 5 through 15 would be built to a design that is largely similar to that of ESG’s design for the first four OPCs, how much of a design-related advantage (as opposed to a production learning curve advantage), if any, would that provide to ESG in the competition? To what degree, if any, does ESG’s design for the OPC include features that are optimized for ESG’s construction facilities?  If a follow-on competition were to permit bidders to submit bids for building their own designs for the OPC, and the winner of the competition is a builder that has submitted a design different from ESG’s design, what might be the longer-term implications of operating and supporting a class of perhaps no more than four OPCs built to ESG’s design?  If a follow-on competition is conducted for building ships 5 through 15 in the OPC program, will the bidders be required to submit bids for only a contract with options, or for both a contract with options and, alternatively, a block buy contract? (See the section below on the issue of annual or multiyear [block buy] contracting for OPCs.) Regarding the second question above, pertaining to design data rights, the Coast Guard stated the following to CRS in September 2017: Eastern Shipyard Group, Inc. (ESG) (or its subcontractors) owns the data rights to specific vessel design elements (e.g., hull form, etc.) that were developed wholly with contractor funds; however, the Coast Guard (in the OPC contract) has the ability to purchase rights 45 As of October 11, 2019, the Coast Guard had obligated $11.3 million and expended $90.5 million on ESG’s detailed design for the OPC. By February 3, 2020, these figures had grown to $122.7 million and $98.1 million, respectively. (Source: Email from Coast Guard liaison office to CRS, February 13, 2020.) Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 19 regarding the hull form for re-procurement purposes. The data rights options for hulls 10-25 are contained within the contract under Section B [of ESG’s OPC contract, called the Phase II contract]. A part of the Phase II contract’s data and software rights clauses, the Coast Guard obtained either unlimited or government purpose data rights to vessel components and systems that were designed and/or developed using government funds or a mixture of contractor and government funds. As a result, the Coast Guard has data rights licenses for parts of the vessel design but not the complete vessel design. To construct the OPC with a yard other than ESG (i.e., potentially for hulls 10-25) the Coast Guard would need to complete its data library by purchasing the data rights owned by ESG (or its subcontractors); pricing for the Coast Guard to procure the additional data rights specifically needed for re-procurement was provided as part of the Phase II contract.46 Regarding the fifth question above, as shown earlier in the excerpts from the Coast Guard’s October 18, 2019, RFI, the Coast Guard is requesting that firms responding to the RFI “provide input on the potential use of a block buy contracting approach during the course of the program and recommendations for incorporation of such an approach if your company deems that block buy contracting is feasible. Also, if your company deems that block buy contracting is not feasible, explain the rationale against using this approach.” Notional Schedule Potential oversight questions relating specifically to the Coast Guard’s notional schedule for acquiring OPCs 5 through 25 include but are not necessarily limited to the following:  Does the schedule for soliciting and awarding industry studies for OPCs the fifth and subsequent OPCs provide proper amounts of time for firms to prepare bids for these contracts and to conduct the studies?  Does the schedule provide a proper amount of time for the Coast Guard to evaluate the results of the industry studies and use the studies to inform the RFP for the DD&C contract?  Would the envisioned procurement rate for the OPCs complete the OPC program too slowly, too quickly, or in about the right amount of time? Regarding the final question above, as mentioned earlier, under the Coast Guard’s new notional timeline, the Coast Guard’s 14 Reliance-class 210-foot medium-endurance cutters would be replaced when they would be (if still in service) about 54 to 67 years old, and the Coast Guard’s 13 Famous-class 270-foot medium-endurance cutters would be replaced when they would be (if still in service) about 42 to 52 years old. November 25, 2019, House Committee Letter Regarding OPC Program A November 25, 2019, letter to the Acting Secretary of DHS from the Chair and Ranking Member of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee and the Chair and Ranking Member of that committee’s Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation subcommittee regarding the OPC program poses a number of questions regarding the Coast Guard’s proposed course of action for the OPC program. The text of this letter, including these questions, is presented in Appendix F. 46 Source: Email from Coast Guard liaison office to CRS, September 6, 2017. The Coast Guard’s email was in response to a question from CRS about whether the Coast Guard owned the data rights for ESG’s OPC design. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 20 Risk of Procurement Cost Growth on OPCs 5-25 Another issue for Congress is the risk of procurement cost growth on OPCs 5 through 25, particularly given the increase in the OPC’s estimated full load displacement from 3,500 to 3,730 tons as of May 2017 to 4,500 tons as of November 2019—an increase of more than 20%—and how this risk might affect the probability that OPCs can be built within the Coast Guard’s affordability requirement for the OPC program of an average unit price of $310 million per ship, or less, in then-year dollars for ships 4 through 9 in the program for the shipbuilder’s portion of the ship’s total cost. Since, as a general matter, the cost of a ship of a given type is roughly proportional to its displacement, the increase of more than 20% in the OPC’s estimated full load displacement raises a possibility that the cost to build OPCs may have increased, perhaps substantially, from earlier estimates. The draft statement of work (SOW) for the Coast Guard’s intended follow-on competition for the OPC program that the Coast Guard posted on November 22, 2019, requires contractors responding to the RFI to provide, among other things, “a risk assessment of achieving the OPC Program’s previously established affordability target for production OPCs.” Annual OPC Procurement Rate The current procurement profile for the OPC, which reaches a maximum projected annual rate of two ships per year, would deliver OPCs many years after the end of the originally planned service lives of the medium-endurance cutters that they are to replace. As mentioned earlier, under the Coast Guard’s new notional timeline, the Coast Guard’s 14 Reliance-class 210-foot medium-endurance cutters would be replaced when they would be (if still in service) about 54 to 67 years old, and the Coast Guard’s 13 Famous-class 270-foot medium-endurance cutters would be replaced when they would be (if still in service) about 42 to 52 years old. These ages, particularly for the Reliance-class cutters, would be very high, raising questions as to whether the ships could be made to last that long, and whether they would be able to cost effectively perform their missions at such ages. Coast Guard officials have testified that the service plans to extend the service lives of the medium-endurance cutters until they are replaced by OPCs. There will be maintenance and repair expenses associated with operating aged medium-endurance cutters, particularly during their final years of intended service, and if the Coast Guard does not also make investments to increase the capabilities of these ships, the ships may have less capability in certain regards than OPCs.47 One possible option for addressing this situation would be to increase the maximum annual OPC procurement rate from the currently planned two ships per year to three or four ships per year. Doing this could result in the 25th OPC being delivered a few to several years sooner than under the currently planned maximum rate. Increasing the OPC procurement rate to three or four ships per year would require a substantial increase to the Coast Guard’s Procurement, Construction, and Improvements (PC&I) account,48 an issue discussed in Appendix B, and/or providing additional funding for the procurement of OPCs through the Navy’s budget. Increasing the maximum procurement rate for the OPC program could, depending on the exact approach taken, reduce OPC unit acquisition costs due to improved production economies of scale. It could also create new opportunities for using competition in the program. Notional 47 For further discussion, see Government Accountability Office, Coast Guard Acquisitions[:] Actions Needed to Address Longstanding Portfolio Management Challenges, GAO 18-454, July 2018, pp. 32-36. 48 Prior to FY2019, the PC&I account was called the Acquisition, Construction, and Improvements (AC&I) account. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 21 alternative approaches for increasing the OPC procurement rate to three or four ships per year include but are not necessarily limited to the following:  increasing the production rate to three or four ships per year at a single shipyard—an option that would depend on that shipyard’s production capacity;  using two shipyards for building OPCs to a single OPC design;  using two shipyards for building OPCs to two designs, with each shipyard building OPCs to its own design—an option that would result in two OPC classes (similar to how the Coast Guard currently operates two primary classes of medium-endurance cutters); or  building additional NSCs in the place of some of the planned OPCs—an option that might include de-scoping equipment on those NSCs where possible to reduce their acquisition cost and make their capabilities more like that of the OPC. The fourth alternative above—which could be viewed as broadly similar to how the Navy is using a de-scoped version of the San Antonio (LPD-17) class amphibious ship as the basis for its LPD-17 Flight II (LPD-30) class amphibious ships49—could be pursued in combination with one of the first three alternatives. Annual or Multiyear (Block Buy) Contracting for OPCs Another issue for Congress is whether to acquire OPCs 5 through 25 using annual contracting or multiyear contracting. The Coast Guard typically uses contracts with options for its shipbuilding programs. Although a contract with options may look like a form of multiyear contracting, it operates more like a series of annual contracts. Contracts with options do not achieve the reductions in acquisition costs that are possible with multiyear contracting. Using multiyear contracting involves accepting certain trade-offs.50 One form of multiyear contracting, called block buy contracting, can be used at the start of a shipbuilding program, beginning with the first ship. (Indeed, this was a principal reason why block buy contracting was in effect invented in FY1998, as the contracting method for procuring the Navy’s first four Virginia-class attack submarines.51) Section 311 of the Frank LoBiondo Coast Guard Authorization Act of 2018 (S. 140/P.L. 115-282 of December 4, 2018) provides 49 For additional discussion, see CRS Report R43543, Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 50 These trade-offs include the following: - reduced congressional control over year-to-year spending, and tying the hands of future Congresses; - reduced flexibility for making changes in Coast Guard acquisition programs in response to unforeseen changes in strategic or budgetary circumstances (which can cause any needed funding reductions to fall more heavily on acquisition programs not covered by multiyear contracts); - a potential need to shift funding from later fiscal years to earlier fiscal years to fund economic order quantity (EOQ) purchases (i.e., up-front batch purchases) of components; - the risk of having to make penalty payments to shipbuilders if multiyear contracts need to be terminated due to unavailability of funds needed for the continuation of the contracts; and - the risk that materials and components purchased for ships to be procured in future years might go to waste if those ships are not eventually procured. 51 For additional discussion, see CRS Report R41909, Multiyear Procurement (MYP) and Block Buy Contracting in Defense Acquisition: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 22 permanent authority for the Coast Guard to use block buy contracting with economic order quantity (EOQ) purchases (i.e., up-front batch purchases) of components in its major acquisition programs. The authority is now codified at 14 U.S.C. 1137. CRS estimates that if the Coast Guard were to use block buy contracting with EOQ purchases of components for acquiring the first several OPCs beginning with OPC 5, and either block buy contracting with EOQ purchases or another form of multiyear contracting known as multiyear procurement (MYP)52 with EOQ purchases for acquiring the remaining ships in the program, the savings on the total acquisition cost of the 25 OPCs (compared to costs under contracts with options) could amount to hundreds of millions of dollars. Planned NSC, OPC, and FRC Procurement Quantities Another issue for Congress concerns the Coast Guard’s planned NSC, OPC, and FRC procurement quantities. The POR’s planned force of 91 NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs is about equal in number to the Coast Guard’s legacy force of 90 high-endurance cutters, medium-endurance cutters, and 110-foot patrol craft. NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs, moreover, are to be individually more capable than the older ships they are to replace. Even so, a Coast Guard analysis conducted in 2011 (the most recent such analysis that the Coast Guard has released) concluded that the planned total of 91 NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs would provide 61% of the cutters that would be needed to fully perform the service’s statutory missions in coming years, in part because Coast Guard mission demands are expected to be greater in coming years than they were in the past. For further discussion of this issue, about which CRS has testified and reported on since 2005,53 see Appendix A. Legislative Activity for FY2021 Summary of Appropriations Action on FY2021 Procurement Funding Request Table 2 summarizes appropriations action on the Coast Guard’s request for FY2021 procurement funding for the NSC, OPC, and FRC programs. Table 2. Summary of Appropriations Action on FY2021 Procurement Funding Request Figures in millions of dollars, rounded to nearest tenth Request Request HAC SAC Final NSC program 31 OPC program 546 FRC program 20 TOTAL 597 52 For more on MYP, see CRS Report R41909, Multiyear Procurement (MYP) and Block Buy Contracting in Defense Acquisition: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 53 See Statement of Ronald O’Rourke, Specialist in National Defense, Congressional Research Service, Before the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee, Subcommittee on Fisheries and the Coast Guard, Hearing on The Coast Guard’s Revised Deepwater Implementation Plan, June 21, 2005, pp. 1-5. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 23 Source: Table prepared by CRS based on Coast Guard’s FY2021 budget submission, HAC committee report, and SAC chairman’s mark and explanatory statement on FY2021 DHS Appropriations Act. HAC is House Appropriations Committee; SAC is Senate Appropriations Committee. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 24 Appendix A. Planned NSC, OPC, and FRC Procurement Quantities This appendix provides further discussion on the issue of the Coast Guard’s planned NSC, OPC, and FRC procurement quantities. Overview The Coast Guard’s program of record for NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs includes only about 61% as many cutters as the Coast Guard calculated in 2011 would be needed to fully perform its projected future missions. (The Coast Guard’s 2011 analysis is the most recent such analysis that the Coast Guard has released.) The Coast Guard’s planned force levels for NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs have remained unchanged since 2004. In contrast, the Navy since 2004 has adjusted its ship force-level goals multiple times in response to changing strategic and budgetary circumstances.54 Although the Coast Guard’s strategic situation and resulting mission demands may not have changed as much as the Navy’s have since 2004, the Coast Guard’s budgetary circumstances may have changed since 2004. The 2004 program of record was heavily conditioned by Coast Guard expectations in 2004 about future funding levels in the PC&I account. Those expectations may now be different, as suggested by the willingness of Coast Guard officials in 2017 to begin regularly mentioning the need for a PC&I funding level of $2 billion per year (see Appendix B). It can also be noted that continuing to, in effect, use the Coast Guard’s 2004 expectations of future funding levels for the PC&I account as an implicit constraint on planned force levels for NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs can encourage an artificially narrow view of Congress’s options regarding future Coast Guard force levels and associated funding levels, depriving Congress of agency in the exercise of its constitutional power to provide for the common defense and general welfare of the United States, and to set funding levels and determine the composition of federal spending. 2009 Coast Guard Fleet Mix Analysis The Coast Guard estimated in 2009 that with the POR’s planned force of 91 NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs, the service would have capability or capacity gaps55 in 6 of its 11 statutory missions—search and rescue (SAR); defense readiness; counterdrug operations; ports, waterways, and coastal security (PWCS); protection of living marine resources (LMR); and alien migrant interdiction operations (AMIO). The Coast Guard judges that some of these gaps would be “high risk” or “very high risk.” Public discussions of the POR frequently mention the substantial improvement that the POR force would represent over the legacy force. Only rarely, however, have these discussions explicitly acknowledged the extent to which the POR force would nevertheless be smaller in number than the force that would be required, by Coast Guard estimate, to fully perform the Coast Guard’s statutory missions in coming years. Discussions that focus on the POR’s 54 See Table 1 and Table B-1 of CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. As shown in those tables, the Navy’s force-level goal of 2002-2004 was followed by new force- level goals in early 2005, February 2006, mid-2011, September 2011, March 2012, January 2013, March 2015, and December 2016. 55 The Coast Guard uses capability as a qualitative term, to refer to the kinds of missions that can be performed, and capacity as a quantitative term, to refer to how much (i.e., to what scale or volume) a mission can be performed. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 25 improvement over the legacy force while omitting mention of the considerably larger number of cutters that would be required, by Coast Guard estimate, to fully perform the Coast Guard’s statutory missions in coming years could encourage audiences to conclude, contrary to Coast Guard estimates, that the POR’s planned force of 91 cutters would be capable of fully performing the Coast Guard’s statutory missions in coming years. In a study completed in December 2009 called the Fleet Mix Analysis (FMA) Phase 1, the Coast Guard calculated the size of the force that in its view would be needed to fully perform the service’s statutory missions in coming years. The study refers to this larger force as the objective fleet mix. Table A-1 compares planned numbers of NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs in the POR to those in the objective fleet mix. Table A-1. Program of Record Compared to Objective Fleet Mix From Fleet Mix Analysis Phase 1 (2009) Ship type Program of Record (POR) Objective Fleet Mix From FMA Phase 1 Objective Fleet Mix compared to POR Number % NSC 8 9 +1 +13% OPC 25 57 +32 +128% FRC 58 91 +33 +57% Total 91 157 +66 +73% Source: Fleet Mix Analysis Phase 1, Executive Summary, Table ES-8 on page ES-13. As can be seen in Table A-1, the objective fleet mix includes 66 additional cutters, or about 73% more cutters than in the POR. Stated the other way around, the POR includes about 58% as many cutters as the 2009 FMA Phase I objective fleet mix. As intermediate steps between the POR force and the objective fleet mix, FMA Phase 1 calculated three additional forces, called FMA-1, FMA-2, and FMA-3. (The objective fleet mix was then relabeled FMA-4.) Table A-2 compares the POR to FMAs 1 through 4. Table A-2. POR Compared to FMAs 1 Through 4 From Fleet Mix Analysis Phase 1 (2009) Ship type Program of Record (POR) FMA-1 FMA-2 FMA-3 FMA-4 (Objective Fleet Mix) NSC 8 9 9 9 9 OPC 25 32 43 50 57 FRC 58 63 75 80 91 Total 91 104 127 139 157 Source: Fleet Mix Analysis Phase 1, Executive Summary, Table ES-8 on page ES-13. FMA-1 was calculated to address the mission gaps that the Coast Guard judged to be “very high risk.” FMA-2 was calculated to address both those gaps and additional gaps that the Coast Guard judged to be “high risk.” FMA-3 was calculated to address all those gaps, plus gaps that the Coast Guard judged to be “medium risk.” FMA-4—the objective fleet mix—was calculated to address all the foregoing gaps, plus the remaining gaps, which the Coast Guard judge to be “low risk” or Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 26 “very low risk.” Table A-3 shows the POR and FMAs 1 through 4 in terms of their mission performance gaps. Table A-3. Force Mixes and Mission Performance Gaps From Fleet Mix Analysis Phase 1 (2009)—an X mark indicates a mission performance gap Missions with performance gaps Risk levels of these performance gaps Program of Record (POR) FMA-1 FMA-2 FMA-3 FMA-4 (Objective Fleet Mix) Search and Rescue (SAR) capability Very high X Defense Readiness capacity Very high X Counter Drug capacity Very high X Ports, Waterways, and Coastal Security (PWCS) capacitya High X X Living Marine Resources (LMR) capability and capacitya High X X [all gaps addressed] PWCS capacityb Medium X X X LMR capacityc Medium X X X Alien Migrant Interdiction Operations (AMIO) capacityd Low/very low X X X X PWCS capacitye Low/very low X X X X Source: Fleet Mix Analysis Phase 1, Executive Summary, page ES-11 through ES-13. Notes: In the first column, The Coast Guard uses capability as a qualitative term, to refer to the kinds of missions that can be performed, and capacity as a quantitative term, to refer to how much (i.e., to what scale or volume) a mission can be performed. a. This gap occurs in the Southeast operating area (Coast Guard Districts 7 and 8) and the Western operating area (Districts 11, 13, and 14). b. This gap occurs in Alaska. c. This gap occurs in Alaska and in the Northeast operating area (Districts 1 and 5). d. This gap occurs in the Southeast and Western operating areas. e. This gap occurs in the Northeast operating area. Figure A-1, taken from FMA Phase 1, depicts the overall mission capability/performance gap situation in graphic form. It appears to be conceptual rather than drawn to precise scale. The black line descending toward 0 by the year 2027 shows the declining capability and performance of the Coast Guard’s legacy assets as they gradually age out of the force. The purple line branching up from the black line shows the added capability from ships and aircraft to be procured under the POR, including the 91 planned NSCs, OPCs, and FRCs. The level of capability to be provided when the POR force is fully in place is the green line, labeled “2005 Mission Needs Statement.” As can be seen in the graph, this level of capability is substantially below a projection of Coast Guard mission demands made after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 (the red line, labeled “Post-9/11 CG Mission Demands”), and even further below a Coast Guard projection of future mission demands (the top dashed line, labeled “Future Mission Demands”). The dashed blue lines show future capability levels that would result from reducing planned procurement quantities in the POR or executing the POR over a longer time period than originally planned. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 27 Figure A-1. Projected Mission Demands vs. Projected Capability/Performance From Fleet Mix Analysis Phase 1, Executive Summary Source: Fleet Mix Analysis Phase 1, Executive Summary, Figure ES-1 on p. ES-2. FMA Phase 1 was a fiscally unconstrained study, meaning that the larger force mixes shown in Table A-2 were calculated primarily on the basis of their capability for performing missions, rather than their potential acquisition or life-cycle operation and support (O&S) costs. Although the FMA Phase 1 was completed in December 2009, the figures shown in Table A-2 were generally not included in public discussions of the Coast Guard’s future force structure needs until April 2011, when GAO presented them in testimony.56 GAO again presented them in a July 2011 report.57 The Coast Guard completed a follow-on study, called Fleet Mix Analysis (FMA) Phase 2, in May 2011. Among other things, FMA Phase 2 includes a revised and updated objective fleet mix called the refined objective mix. Table A-4 compares the POR to the objective fleet mix from FMA Phase 1 and the refined objective mix from FMA Phase 2. As can be seen in Table A-4, compared to the objective fleet mix from FMA Phase 1, the refined objective mix from FMA Phase 2 includes 49 OPCs rather than 57. The refined objective mix includes 58 additional cutters, or about 64% more cutters than in the POR. Stated the other way around, the POR includes about 61% as many cutters as the refined objective mix. 56 Government Accountability Office, Coast Guard[:]Observations on Acquisition Management and Efforts to Reassess the Deepwater Program, Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation, Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, House of Representatives, Statement of John P. Hutton, Director Acquisition and Sourcing Management, GAO-11-535T, April 13, 2011, p. 10. 57 Government Accountability Office, Coast Guard[:]Action Needed As Approved Deepwater Program Remains Unachievable, GAO-11-743, July 2011, p. 46. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 28 Table A-4. POR Compared to Objective Mixes in FMA Phases 1 and 2 From Fleet Mix Analysis Phase 1 (2009) and Phase 2 (2011) Ship type Program of Record (POR) Objective Fleet Mix from FMA Phase 1 Refined Objective Mix from FMA Phase 2 NSC 8 9 9 OPC 25 57 49 FRC 58 91 91 Total 91 157 149 Source: Fleet Mix Analysis Phase 1, Executive Summary, Table ES-8 on page ES-13, and Fleet Mix Analysis Phase 2, Table ES-2 on p. iv. Compared to the POR, the larger force mixes shown in Table A-2 and Table A-4 would be more expensive to procure, operate, and support than the POR force. Using the average NSC, OPC, and FRC procurement cost figures presented earlier (see “Background”), procuring the 58 additional cutters in the Refined Objective Mix from FMA Phase 2 might cost an additional $10.7 billion, of which most (about $7.8 billion) would be for the 24 additional FRCs. (The actual cost would depend on numerous factors, such as annual procurement rates.) O&S costs for these 58 additional cutters over their life cycles (including crew costs and periodic ship maintenance costs) would require billions of additional dollars.58 The larger force mixes in the FMA Phase 1 and 2 studies, moreover, include not only increased numbers of cutters, but also increased numbers of Coast Guard aircraft. In the FMA Phase 1 study, for example, the objective fleet mix included 479 aircraft—93% more than the 248 aircraft in the POR mix. Stated the other way around, the POR includes about 52% as many aircraft as the objective fleet mix. A decision to procure larger numbers of cutters like those shown in Table A-2 and Table A-4 might thus also imply a decision to procure, operate, and support larger numbers of Coast Guard aircraft, which would require billions of additional dollars. The FMA Phase 1 study estimated the procurement cost of the objective fleet mix of 157 cutters and 479 aircraft at $61 billion to $67 billion in constant FY2009 dollars, or about 66% more than the procurement cost of $37 billion to $40 billion in constant FY2009 dollars estimated for the POR mix of 91 cutters and 248 aircraft. The study estimated the total ownership cost (i.e., procurement plus life-cycle O&S cost) of the objective fleet mix of cutters and aircraft at $201 billion to $208 billion in constant FY2009 dollars, or about 53% more than the total ownership cost of $132 billion to $136 billion in constant FY2009 dollars estimated for POR mix of cutters and aircraft.59 A December 7, 2015, press report states the following: The Coast Guard’s No. 2 officer said the small size and advanced age of its fleet is limiting the service’s ability to carry out crucial missions in the Arctic and drug transit zones or to meet rising calls for presence in the volatile South China Sea. 58 The FMA Phase 1 and Phase 2 studies present acquisition and life-cycle ownership cost calculations for force mixes that include not only larger numbers of NSC, OPCs, and FRCs, but corresponding larger numbers of Coast Guard aircraft. 59 Fleet Mix Analysis Phase 1, Executive Summary, Table ES-11 on page ES-19, and Table ES-10 on page ES-18. The life-cycle O&S cost was calculated through 2050. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 29 “The lack of surface vessels every day just breaks my heart,” VADM Charles Michel, the Coast Guard’s vice commandant, said Dec. 7. Addressing a forum on American Sea Power sponsored by the U.S. Naval Institute at the Newseum, Michel detailed the problems the Coast Guard faces in trying to carry out its missions of national security, law enforcement and maritime safety because of a lack of resources. “That’s why you hear me clamoring for recapitalization,” he said. Michel noted that China’s coast guard has a lot more ships than the U.S. Coast Guard has, including many that are larger than the biggest U.S. cutter, the 1,800-ton [sic:4,800-ton] National Security Cutter. China is using those white-painted vessels rather than “gray-hull navy” ships to enforce its claims to vast areas of the South China Sea, including reefs and shoals claimed by other nations, he said. That is a statement that the disputed areas are “so much our territory, we don’t need the navy. That’s an absolutely masterful use of the coast guard,” he said. The superior numbers of Chinese coast guard vessels and its plans to build more is something, “we have to consider when looking at what we can do in the South China Sea,” Michel said. Although they have received requests from the U.S. commanders in the region for U.S. Coast Guard cutters in the South China Sea, “the commandant had to say ‘no’. There’s not enough to go around,” he said.60 Potential oversight questions for Congress include the following:  Under the POR force mix, how large a performance gap, precisely, would there be in each of the missions shown in Table A-3? What impact would these performance gaps have on public safety, national security, and protection of living marine resources?  How sensitive are these performance gaps to the way in which the Coast Guard translates its statutory missions into more precise statements of required mission performance?  Given the performance gaps shown in Table A-3, should planned numbers of Coast Guard cutters and aircraft be increased, or should the Coast Guard’s statutory missions be reduced, or both?  How much larger would the performance gaps in Table A-3 be if planned numbers of Coast Guard cutters and aircraft are reduced below the POR figures?  Has the executive branch made sufficiently clear to Congress the difference between the number of ships and aircraft in the POR force and the number that would be needed to fully perform the Coast Guard’s statutory missions in coming years? Why has public discussion of the POR focused mostly on the capability improvement it would produce over the legacy force and rarely on the performance gaps it would have in the missions shown in Table A-3? 60 Otto Kreisher, “’Not Enough’ USCG Vessels to Meet Demand for Presence in South China Sea, Arctic,” Seapower, December 7, 2015. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 30  What projected mission demands or other factors may have changed since the Coast Guard’s 2011 Fleet Mix Analysis, and how might these changes affect future required numbers of Coast Guard cutters and other Coast Guard assets?61 61 For a blog post discussing this issue, see Chuck Hill, “Is Our Fleet Recapitalization on Course? Do We Need to Change the Destination?” Chuck Hill’s CG Blog, September 8, 2019. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 31 Appendix B. Funding Levels in PC&I Account This appendix provides background information on funding levels in the Coast Guard’s Procurement, Construction, and Improvements (PC&I) account.62 Overview Table B-1 shows funding programmed in the PC&I account under the Coast Guard’s FY2013-FY2021 budget submissions. 62 Prior to FY2019, the PC&I account was called the Acquisition, Construction, and Improvements (AC&I) account. CRS-32 Table B-1. Funding in PC&I Account in FY2013-FY2020 Budgets Figures in millions of dollars, rounded to nearest tenth Budget FY13 FY14 FY15 FY16 FY17 FY18 FY19 FY20 FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24 FY25 Avg. FY13 1,217.3 1,429.5 1,619.9 1,643.8 1,722.0 1,526.5 FY14 951.1 1,195.7 901.0 1,024.8 1,030.3 1,020.6 FY15 1,084.2 1,103.0 1,128.9 1,180.4 1,228.7 1,145.0 FY16 1,017.3 1,125.3 1,255.7 1,201.0 1,294.6 1,178.8 FY17 1,136.8 1,259.6 1,339.9 1,560.5 1,840.8 1,427.5 FY18 1,203.7 1,360.9 1,602.7 1,810.6 1,687.5 1,533.1 FY19 1,886.8 1,473.0 1,679.8 1,555.5 1,698.5 1,658.7 FY20 1,234.7 1,679.8 1,555.5 1,698.5 1,737.0 1,581.1 1,637.1 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Source: Table prepared by CRS based on Coast Guard FY2013-FY2020 budget submissions. n/a means not available. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 33 The Coast Guard has testified that funding the PC&I account at a level of about $1 billion to $1.2 billion per year (the average levels under the FY2014-FY2016 budget submissions) would make it difficult to fund various Coast Guard acquisition projects, including the PSC program and improvements to Coast Guard shore installations. Coast Guard plans call for procuring OPCs at an eventual rate of two per year. If each OPC costs roughly $400 million, procuring two OPCs per year in a PC&I account of about $1 billion to $1.2 billion per year, as programmed under the FY2014-FY2016 budget submissions, would leave about $200 million to $400 million per year for all other PC&I-funded programs. Since 2017, Coast Guard officials have been stating more regularly what they stated only infrequently in earlier years—that executing the Coast Guard’s various acquisition programs fully and on a timely basis would require the PC&I account to be funded at a level of about $2 billion per year. Statements from Coast Guard officials on this issue in past years have sometimes put this figure as high as about $2.5 billion per year. Using Past PC&I Funding Levels as a Guide for Future PC&I Funding Levels In assessing future funding levels for executive branch agencies, a common practice is to assume or predict that the figure in coming years will likely be close to where it has been in previous years. While this method can be of analytical and planning value, for an agency like the Coast Guard, which goes through periods with less acquisition of major platforms and periods with more acquisition of major platforms, this approach might not always be the best approach, at least for the PC&I account. More important, in relation to maintaining Congress’s status as a co-equal branch of government, including the preservation and use of congressional powers and prerogatives, an analysis that assumes or predicts that future funding levels will resemble past funding levels can encourage an artificially narrow view of congressional options regarding future funding levels, depriving Congress of agency in the exercise of its constitutional power to set funding levels and determine the composition of federal spending. Past Coast Guard Statements About Required PC&I Funding Level At an October 4, 2011, hearing on the Coast Guard’s major acquisition programs before the Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation subcommittee of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, the following exchange occurred: REPRESENATIVE FRANK LOBIONDO: Can you give us your take on what percentage of value must be invested each year to maintain current levels of effort and to allow the Coast Guard to fully carry out its missions? ADMIRAL ROBERT J. PAPP, COMMANDANT OF THE COAST GUARD: I think I can, Mr. Chairman. Actually, in discussions and looking at our budget—and I’ll give you rough numbers here, what we do now is we have to live within the constraints that we’ve been averaging about $1.4 billion in acquisition money each year. If you look at our complete portfolio, the things that we’d like to do, when you look at the shore infrastructure that needs to be taken care of, when you look at renovating our smaller icebreakers and other ships and aircraft that we have, we’ve done some rough estimates that it would really take close to about $2.5 billion a year, if we were to do all the things that we would like to do to sustain our capital plant. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 34 So I’m just like any other head of any other agency here, as that the end of the day, we’re given a top line and we have to make choices and tradeoffs and basically, my tradeoffs boil down to sustaining frontline operations balancing that, we’re trying to recapitalize the Coast Guard and there’s where the break is and where we have to define our spending.63 An April 18, 2012, blog entry stated the following: If the Coast Guard capital expenditure budget remains unchanged at less than $1.5 billion annually in the coming years, it will result in a service in possession of only 70 percent of the assets it possesses today, said Coast Guard Rear Adm. Mark Butt. Butt, who spoke April 17 [2012] at [a] panel [discussion] during the Navy League Sea Air Space conference in National Harbor, Md., echoed Coast Guard Commandant Robert Papp in stating that the service really needs around $2.5 billion annually for procurement.64 At a May 9, 2012, hearing on the Coast Guard’s proposed FY2013 budget before the Homeland Security subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee, Admiral Papp testified, “I’ve gone on record saying that I think the Coast Guard needs closer to $2 billion dollars a year [in acquisition funding] to recapitalize—[to] do proper recapitalization.”65 At a May 14, 2013, hearing on the Coast Guard’s proposed FY2014 budget before the Homeland Security Subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee, Admiral Papp stated the following regarding the difference between having about $1.0 billion per year rather than about $1.5 billion per year in the PC&I account: Well, Madam Chairman, $500 million—a half a billion dollars—is real money for the Coast Guard. So, clearly, we had $1.5 billion in the [FY]13 budget. It doesn't get everything I would like, but it—it gave us a good start, and it sustained a number of projects that are very important to us. When we go down to the $1 billion level this year, it gets my highest priorities in there, but we have to either terminate or reduce to minimum order quantities for all the other projects that we have going. If we're going to stay with our program of record, things that have been documented that we need for our service, we're going to have to just stretch everything out to the right. And when we do that, you cannot order in economic order quantities. It defers the purchase. Ship builders, aircraft companies—they have to figure in their costs, and it inevitably raises the cost when you're ordering them in smaller quantities and pushing it off to the right. 63 Source: Transcript of hearing. 64 David Perera, “The Coast Guard Is Shrinking,” FierceHomelandSecurity.com, April 18, 2012, accessed July 20, 2012, at http://www.fiercehomelandsecurity.com/story/coast-guard-shrinking/2012-04-18. 65 Source: transcript of hearing. Papp may have been referring to remarks he made to the press before giving his annual state of the Coast Guard speech on February 23, 2012, in which reportedly stated that the Coast Guard would require about $2 billion per year in acquisition funding to fully replace its current assets. (See Adam Benson, “Coast Guard Cutbacks Will Cost 1,000 Jobs,” Norwich Bulletin, February 23, 2012, accessed May 31, 2012, at http://www.norwichbulletin.com/x1138492141/Coast-Guard-cutbacks-will-cost-1-000-jobs. See also “Coast Guard Leader Calls For More Ships,” MilitaryFeed.com, February 24, 2012, accessed May 31, 2012, at http://militaryfeed.com/coast-guard-leader-calls-for-more-ships-5/; Associated Press, “Coast Guard Commandant Calls for New Ships,” TheLog.com, March 10, 2012, accessed May 31, 2012, at http://www.thelog.com/SNW/Article/Coast-Guard-Commandant-Calls-for-New-Ships-to-Replace-Aging-Fleet; Mickey McCarter, “Congress Poised to Give Coast Guard More Money Than Requested for FY 2013,” HSToday.us, May 10, 2012, accessed May 31, 2012, at http://www.hstoday.us/focused-topics/customs-immigration/single-article-page/congress-poised-to-give-coast-guard-more-money-than-requested-for-fy-2013.html.) See also “Interview, Adm. Robert Papp, US Coast Guard Commandant,” Defense News, November 11, 2013: 30. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 35 Plus, it almost creates a death spiral for the Coast Guard because we are forced to sustain older assets—older ships and older aircraft—which ultimately cost us more money, so it eats into our operating funds, as well, as we try to sustain these older things. So, we'll do the best we can within the budget. And the president and the secretary have addressed my highest priorities, and we'll just continue to go on the—on an annual basis seeing what we can wedge into the budget to keep the other projects going.66 At a March 12, 2014, hearing on the Coast Guard’s proposed FY2015 budget before the Homeland Security subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee, Admiral Papp stated the following: Well, that’s what we've been struggling with, as we deal with the five-year plan, the capital investment plan, is showing how we are able to do that. And it will be a challenge, particularly if it sticks at around $1 billion [per year]. As I've said publicly, and actually, I said we could probably—I've stated publicly before that we could probably construct comfortably at about 1.5 billion [dollars] a year. But if we were to take care of all the Coast Guard’s projects that are out there, including shore infrastructure that that fleet that takes care of the Yemen [sic: inland] waters is approaching 50 years of age, as well, but I have no replacement plan in sight for them because we simply can't afford it. Plus, we need at some point to build a polar icebreaker. Darn tough to do all that stuff when you're pushing down closer to 1 billion [dollars per year], instead of 2 billion [dollars per year]. As I said, we could fit most of that in at about the 1.5 billion [dollars per year] level, but the projections don't call for that. So we are scrubbing the numbers as best we can.67 At a March 24, 2015, hearing on the Coast Guard’s proposed FY2016 budget before the Homeland Security subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee, Admiral Paul Zukunft, Admiral Papp’s successor as Commandant of the Coast Guard, stated the following: I look back to better years in our acquisition budget when we had a—an acquisition budget of—of $1.5 billion. That allows me to move these programs along at a much more rapid pace and, the quicker I can build these at full-rate production, the less cost it is in the long run as well. But there’s an urgent need for me to be able to deliver these platforms in a timely and also in an affordable manner. But to at least have a reliable and a predictable acquisition budget would make our work in the Coast Guard much easier. But when we see variances of—of 30, 40% over a period of three or four years, and not knowing what the Budget Control Act may have in store for us going on, yes, we are treading water now but any further reductions, and now I am—I am beyond asking for help. We are taking on water.68 An April 13, 2017, press report states the following (emphasis added): Coast Guard Commandant Adm. Paul Zukunft on Wednesday [April 12] said that for the Coast Guard to sustain its recapitalization plans and operations the service needs a $2 billion annual acquisition budget that grows modestly overtime to keep pace with inflation. The Coast Guard needs a “predictable, reliable” acquisition budget “and within that we need 5 percent annual growth to our operations and maintenance (O&M) accounts,” Zukunft told reporters at a Defense Writers Group breakfast. Inflation will clip 2 to 3 66 Transcript of hearing. The remarks were made in response to a question from Sen. Mary Landrieu. 67 Transcript of hearing. 68 Transcript of hearing. The remarks were made in response to a question from Rep. John Culberson. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 36 percent from that, but “at 5 percent or so it puts you on a moderate but positive glide slope so you can execute, so you can build the force,” he said.69 In an interview published on June 1, 2017, Zukunft said the following (emphasis added): We cannot be more relevant than we are now. But what we need is predictable funding. We have been in over 16 continuing resolutions since 2010. I need stable and repeatable funding. An acquisition budget with a floor of $2 billion. Our operating expenses as I said, they’ve been funded below the Budget Control Act floor for the past five years. I need 5 percent annualized growth over the next five years and beyond to start growing some of this capability back. But more importantly, we [need] more predictable, more reliable funding so we can execute what we need to do to carry out the business of the world’s best Coast Guard.70 69 Calvin Biesecker, “Zukunft Wants $2 Billion Baseline Acquisition Budget; Sustained Growth In O&M Funding,” Defense Daily, April 13, 2017: 1. 70 Jill Aitoro, “Interview: Adm. Paul Zukunft Demands Coast Guard Respect,” Defense News, June 1, 2017. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 37 Appendix C. Information on NSC, OPC, and FRC Programs from GAO Report This appendix presents additional information on the status and execution of the NSC, OPC, and FRC programs from a May 2018 GAO report reviewing DHS acquisition programs.71 NSC Program Regarding the NSC program, the May 2018 GAO report states the following: DHS’s Under Secretary for Management (USM) directed the USCG to complete follow-on operational test and evaluation (OT&E) by March 2019. According to USCG officials, the program’s OTA began follow-on OT&E in October 2017, which will test unmet key performance parameters (KPP) and address deficiencies found during prior testing. The NSC completed initial operational testing in 2014, but did not fully demonstrate 7 of its 19 KPPs, including those related to unmanned aircraft and cutter-boat deployment in rough seas. According to USCG officials, operators have since demonstrated these KPPs during USCG operations. For example, USCG officials stated that they successfully demonstrated operations of a prototype unmanned aircraft on an NSC. However, the USCG will not evaluate the NSC’s unmanned aircraft KPP until the unmanned aircraft undergoes initial OT&E, currently planned for June 2019. In addition, the NSC will be the first USCG asset to undergo cybersecurity testing. However, this test has been delayed over a year with the final cyber test event scheduled for August 2018 because of a change in NSC operational schedules, among other things. The DHS USM also directed the USCG to complete a study to determine the root cause of the NSC’s propulsion system issues by December 2017; however, as of January 2018, the study was not yet complete. GAO previously reported on these issues—including high engine temperatures, cracked cylinder heads, and overheating generator bearings that were impacting missions—in January 2016.... The USCG initially planned to implement a crew rotational concept in which crews would rotate while NSCs were underway to achieve a goal of 230 days away from the cutter’s homeport. In February 2018, USCG officials told GAO they abandoned the crew rotational concept because the concept did not provide the USCG with the expected return on investment. Instead, USCG officials said a new plan has been implemented that does not rotate crew and is anticipated to increase the days away from home port from the current capability of 185 days to 200 days.72 OPC Program Regarding the OPC program, the May 2018 GAO report states the following: DHS approved six key performance parameters (KPP) for the OPC related to the ship’s operating range and duration, crew size, interoperability and maneuverability, and ability to support operations in moderate to rough seas. The first OPC has not yet been constructed, so the USCG has not yet demonstrated whether it can meet these KPPs. The USCG plans 71 Government Accountability Office, Home Security Acquisitions[:] Leveraging Programs’ results Could Further DHS’s Progress to Improve Portfolio Management, May 2018, GAO-18-339SP, 109 pp., and Government Accountability Office, Homeland Security Acquisitions[:]DHS Has Strengthened Management, but Execution and Affordability Concerns Endure, GAO-16-338SP, March 2016, 110 pp. Hereinafter GAO-18-339SP and GAO-16-338SP, respectively. 72 GAO-18-339SP, p. 92. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 38 to use engineering reviews, and developmental and operational tests throughout the acquisition to measure the OPC’s performance. USCG officials told GAO that the program completed an early operational assessment on the basic ship design in August 2017, which entailed a review of the current design plans. The program plans to refine the ship’s design as needed based on preliminary test results. However, as of December 2017, USCG officials had not received the results of this assessment. The USCG plans to conduct initial operational test and evaluation (OT&E) on the first OPC in fiscal year 2023. However, the test results from initial OT&E will not be available to inform key decisions. For example, the results will not be available to inform the decision to build 2 OPCs per year—which USCG officials said is scheduled to begin in fiscal year 2021. Without test results to inform these key decisions, the USCG must make substantial commitments prior to knowing how well the ship will meet its requirements.... The USCG is in the process of completing the design of the OPC before starting construction, which is in-line with GAO shipbuilding best practices. In addition, USCG officials stated that the program is using state-of-the-market technology that has been proven on other ships as opposed to state-of-the-art technology, which lowers the risk of the program.73 FRC Program Regarding the FRC program, the May 2018 GAO report states the following: In February 2017, DHS’s Director, Office of Test and Evaluation (DOT&E) assessed the results from the program’s July 2016 follow-on operational test and evaluation (OT&E) and determined that • the program met its six key performance parameters, and • the FRC was operationally effective and suitable. During follow-on OT&E, the OTA found that several deficiencies from the program’s initial OT&E had been corrected. For example, the OTA closed a severe deficiency related to the engines based on modifications to the FRC’s main diesel engines. However, five major deficiencies remain. According to USCG officials, the remaining deficiencies are related to ergonomics (e.g., improving the working environment for operators) and issues with stowage space. USCG officials stated that they plan to resolve the remaining deficiencies by fiscal year 2020. DOT&E noted that these deficiencies do not prevent mission completion or present a danger to personnel, but recommended that they be resolved as soon as possible. USCG officials indicated that they plan to resolve the remaining deficiencies through engineering or other changes.... The USCG continues to work with the contractor—Bollinger Shipyards, LLC—to address issues covered by the warranty and acceptance clauses for each ship. For example, 18 engines—9 operational engines and 9 spare engines—have been replaced under the program’s warranty. According to USCG documentation, 65 percent of the current issues with the engines have been resolved through retrofits; however, additional problems with the engines have been identified since our April 2017 review. For example, issues with water pump shafts are currently being examined through a root cause analysis and will be redesigned and are scheduled to undergo retrofits starting in December 2018. We previously found that the FRC’s warranty resulted in improved cost and quality by requiring the shipbuilder to pay for the repair of defects. As of September 2017, USCG 73 GAO-18-339SP, p. 94. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 39 officials said the replacements and retrofits completed under the program’s warranty allowed the USCG to avoid an estimated $104 million in potential unplanned costs—of which $63 million is related to the engines.74 For a discussion of some considerations relating to warranties in shipbuilding and other acquisition programs, see Appendix D. 74 GAO-18-339SP, p. 82. For additional discussions of warranties in acquisition programs, see Appendix D. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 40 Appendix D. Some Considerations Relating to Warranties in Shipbuilding This appendix presents some considerations relating to warranties in shipbuilding and other defense acquisition.75 In discussions of Navy and Coast Guard shipbuilding, one question that sometimes arises is whether including a warranty in a shipbuilding contract is preferable to not including one. Including a warranty in a shipbuilding contract (or a contract for building some other kind of military end item), while potentially valuable, might not always be preferable to not including one—it depends on the circumstances of the acquisition, and it is not necessarily a valid criticism of an acquisition program to state that it is using a contract that does not include a warranty (or a weaker form of a warranty rather than a stronger one). Including a warranty generally shifts to the contractor the risk of having to pay for fixing problems with earlier work. Although that in itself could be deemed desirable from the government’s standpoint, a contractor negotiating a contract that will have a warranty will incorporate that risk into its price, and depending on how much the contractor might charge for doing that, it is possible that the government could wind up paying more in total for acquiring the item (including fixing problems with earlier work on that item) than it would have under a contract without a warranty. When a warranty is not included in the contract and the government pays later on to fix problems with earlier work, those payments can be very visible, which can invite critical comments from observers. But that does not mean that including a warranty in the contract somehow frees the government from paying to fix problems with earlier work. In a contract that includes a warranty, the government will indeed pay something to fix problems with earlier work—but it will make the payment in the less-visible (but still very real) form of the up-front charge for including the warranty, and that charge might be more than what it would have cost the government, under a contract without a warranty, to pay later on for fixing those problems. From a cost standpoint, including a warranty in the contract might or might not be preferable, depending on the risk that there will be problems with earlier work that need fixing, the potential cost of fixing such problems, and the cost of including the warranty in the contract. The point is that the goal of avoiding highly visible payments for fixing problems with earlier work and the goal of minimizing the cost to the government of fixing problems with earlier work are separate and different goals, and that pursuing the first goal can sometimes work against achieving the second goal.76 75 This appendix is adapted from Appendix C of CRS Testimony TE10019, Options and Considerations for Achieving a 355-Ship Navy, by Ronald O'Rourke. 76 It can also be noted that the country’s two largest builders of Navy ships—General Dynamics (GD) and Huntington Ingalls Industries (HII)—derive about 60% and 96%, respectively, of their revenues from U.S. government work. (See General Dynamics, 2016 Annual Report, page 9 of Form 10-K [PDF page 15 of 88]) and Huntington Ingalls Industries, 2016 Annual Report, page 5 of Form 10-K [PDF page 19 of 134]). These two shipbuilders operate the only U.S. shipyards currently capable of building several major types of Navy ships, including submarines, aircraft carriers, large surface combatants, and amphibious ships. Thus, even if a warranty in a shipbuilding contract with one of these firms were to somehow mean that the government did not have pay under the terms of that contract—either up front or later on—for fixing problems with earlier work done under that contract, there would still be a question as to whether the government would nevertheless wind up eventually paying much of that cost as part of the price of one or more future contracts the government may have that firm. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 41 The Department of Defense’s guide on the use of warranties states the following: Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) 46.7 states that “the use of warranties is not mandatory.” However, if the benefits to be derived from the warranty are commensurate with the cost of the warranty, the CO [contracting officer] should consider placing it in the contract. In determining whether a warranty is appropriate for a specific acquisition, FAR Subpart 46.703 requires the CO to consider the nature and use of the supplies and services, the cost, the administration and enforcement, trade practices, and reduced requirements. The rationale for using a warranty should be documented in the contract file.... In determining the value of a warranty, a CBA [cost-benefit analysis] is used to measure the life cycle costs of the system with and without the warranty. A CBA is required to determine if the warranty will be cost beneficial. CBA is an economic analysis, which basically compares the Life Cycle Costs (LCC) of the system with and without the warranty to determine if warranty coverage will improve the LCCs. In general, five key factors will drive the results of the CBA: cost of the warranty + cost of warranty administration + compatibility with total program efforts + cost of overlap with Contractor support + intangible savings. Effective warranties integrate reliability, maintainability, supportability, availability, and life-cycle costs. Decision factors that must be evaluated include the state of the weapon system technology, the size of the warranted population, the likelihood that field performance requirements can be achieved, and the warranty period of performance.77 77 Department of Defense, Department of Defense Warranty Guide, Version 1.0, September 2009, accessed July 13, 2017, at https://www.acq.osd.mil/dpap/pdi/uid/docs/departmentofdefensewarrantyguide[1].doc. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 42 Appendix E. Impact of Hurricane Michael on OPC Program at Eastern Shipbuilding This appendix provides additional background information of the impact of Hurricane Michael on the OPC program at Eastern Shipbuilding Group (ESG). An August 22, 2019, press released from Eastern Shipbuilding states On August 16th, 2019 Eastern Shipbuilding Group, a Panama City, Florida shipyard building both government and commercial vessels, successfully delivered the tug Capt. Jim McAllister. This is the fifth vessel to be delivered by the shipyard since Hurricane Michael, a category 5 storm—which devastated the region. This delivery marks another milestone in Eastern’s accelerated return to normal operations, as well as its commitment to long term sustained recovery and economic stability for the industrial base of the Florida Panhandle. Other shipbuilding projects include three Staten Island Ferries, the Coast Guard Offshore Patrol Cutters, a large commercial fishing trawler, two harbor tugs, and two river pushboats. Eastern is actively bidding other projects and is poised to maintain its position as the go to shipyard on the US Gulf. All of these projects support skilled manufacturing jobs for Northwest Florida and over twenty five other states where Eastern buys material, equipment, and specialized services. Since the hurricane, Eastern has repaired or replaced all of its impacted equipment, buildings, and shipbuilding infrastructure as part of a major company-funded recapitalization effort. Additionally, Eastern has invested in new technology aimed at increasing shipbuilding efficiency. Eastern has also partnered with State and local Governmental agencies to plan additional investments of over $45 Million towards enhancing shipbuilding efficiency and capacity in both Bay and Gulf Counties in order to ensure long term stability and growth of the shipbuilding industry in Northwest Florida. As part of its recovery and growth from a once-in-a-generation storm, Eastern is actively recruiting and hiring additional personnel to join its team and support its long term commitment to building the best vessels for its government and commercial customers. Eastern remains grateful for the unwavering Federal, State, and local support during this recovery—empowering a devastated area by providing manufacturing and industrial employment opportunities.78 A July 31, 2019, press report states A bill needed to continue a long-awaited multi-billion-dollar Coast Guard shipbuilding project in Panama City sailed through a U.S. Senate committee on Wednesday [July 31]. The bill, which received bipartisan support in the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, would let the Coast Guard renegotiate its $10.5 billion contract with Eastern Shipbuilding Group to account for higher labor costs and shortages caused by Hurricane Michael. The bill should help the project get back on track after the hurricane to create hundreds of new jobs that are needed more than ever as the area still recovers from the Category 5 storm, some officials say. According to a Wednesday news release, the committee approved U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio’s Restore Coast Guard Capabilities Act [S. 2319] as part of the Coast Guard Reauthorization Act of 2019. Rubio’s bill would give the Coast Guard the authority to renegotiate the contract with Eastern Shipbuilding to construct the first series of up to 25 offshore patrol 78 Eastern Shipbuilding, “Eastern Shipbuilding Group, Inc. Successfully Delivers Fifth Vessel Since Hurricane Michael,” August 22, 2019. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 43 cutters. Without a way to renegotiate the contract, the project could be delayed by years, Rubio’s office warned. The Coast Guard requested the authority to renegotiate, while not exceeding the original affordability requirement set forth by the government in the existing contract, because of skyrocketing labor costs caused by the hurricane. The historic storm, which hit the Panhandle on Oct. 10, significantly damaged Tyndall Air Force Base. The press release states that the labor needed to rebuild the base is competing directly with the labor required to fulfill Eastern Shipbuilding’s contract.79 A May 22, 2019, press report states A Category 5 hurricane that battered Florida’s panhandle region last fall, including shipbuilder Eastern Shipbuilding Group, will impact the new medium-endurance cutter ship the company is building for the Coast Guard but at the moment it’s unclear what the 79 Patrick McCreless, “Bill Passes Committee to Renogotiate Panama City Coast Guard Shipbuilding Contract,” Panama City News Herald, July 31, 2019. The press release mentioned in the article, dated July 31, 2019, states Today, U.S. Senator Marco Rubio (R-FL) applauded the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation’s approval of his Restore Coast Guard Capabilities Act (S.2319) as part of the Coast Guard Reauthorization Act of 2019 (S. 2297). Rubio’s bill would give the U.S. Coast Guard the authority to take into account the impacts of Hurricane Michael to modify its Offshore Patrol Cutter (OPC) contract with Panama City-based Eastern Shipbuilding. On October 10, 2018, Hurricane Michael wreaked havoc in Northwest Florida, and made history as one of only four category 5 hurricanes to make landfall on the U.S. mainland. The Coast Guard has requested this authority that would provide much needed flexibility to modify the OPC contract, while not exceeding the original affordability requirement set forth by the government in the existing contract, as a result of skyrocketing labor costs due to Hurricane Michael. The Coast Guard maintains that acquisition of the OPC is its highest investment priority. “Continuing authorizations for the Coast Guard to protect Florida’s waterways and our nation’s homeland security is imperative,” Rubio said. “I applaud the Senate Commerce Committee on approving this larger reauthorization, which includes several of my joint priorities that are critical to the Coast Guard’s mission readiness. As a result of my partnership with Senator Scott, the bill now includes our Restore Coast Guard Capabilities Act, which will ensure the Coast Guard has the tools necessary to safeguard the Offshore Patrol Cutter even after the devastation caused by Hurricane Michael.” Today, the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation approved the Coast Guard Reauthorization Act of 2019 (S. 2297), which included several Rubio priorities:  The Restore Coast Guard Capabilities Act (S. 2319), adopted as an amendment offered by Senator Scott  Section 426: Coast Guard Shore Infrastructure Improvement Act  Section 221: Continuation of Coast Guard pay during lapse in appropriations. Senator Rubio is a cosponsor of the Pay Our Coast Guard Act (S. 21) Background: Eastern Shipbuilding is under contract with the Coast Guard to deliver up to 25 OPCs, the Coast Guard’s highest priority investment program. However, Hurricane Michael significantly damaged Tyndall Air Force Base and the labor needed to rebuild the base is competing directly with the labor to fulfill the OPC contract. As a result, the Coast Guard has requested authorization from Congress to potentially revisit the contract to take into account the increased labor costs associated with the category 5 hurricane. (“Rubio Applauds Commerce Committee Passage of the Restore Coast Guard Capabilities Act to Build Offshore Patrol Cutters,” July 31, 2019, accessed September 10, 2019, at https://www.rubio.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/press-releases?ID=52E5D8E4-2559-4F67-AFBD-D70EE38FC7A5.) Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 44 effects will be on cost and schedule, Coast Guard Commandant Adm. Karl Schultz said on Tuesday [May 21]. Eastern Shipbuilding’s analysis of Hurricane Michael’s impact on the Offshore Patrol Cutter (OPC) is due to the Coast Guard by May 31, and from there the service expects to have an understanding on the way forward with the program before the end of June, Schultz said in response to questions from Rep. Garret Graves (R-La.), during a hearing hosted by the House Transportation and Infrastructure Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Subcommittee. He said Eastern Shipbuilding will provide “perspectives” on the cost and schedule and any other impacts. “It’s safe to say that we understand the impacts of a Category 5 hurricane on Eastern Shipbuilding Group will have an impact on the OPC program,” Shultz said. He expects there to be some “puts and takes” after Eastern Shipbuilding submits its analysis. Rep. Peter DeFazio (D-Ore.), citing a press report earlier in the hearing, said that Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) has inserted language in a draft disaster assistance bill allowing the Coast Guard and Eastern Shipbuilding to renegotiate the firm fixed-price contract the shipbuilder is working under for the OPC to account for damage to shore side facilities from Hurricane Michael and increased labor costs. DeFazio said he is skeptical of the company’s claim, noting, “I’m pretty sure they had insurance,” and adding that “I question whether or not this has something to do with their original bid, which some thought was low.” He also said he has concerns that a former Coast Guard Commandant that works for Eastern Shipbuilding has said he’ll have authority to negotiate with his former service. Retired Adm. Robert Papp, the 24th commandant of the Coast Guard, runs Eastern Shipbuilding’s Washington, D.C., operations. Eastern Shipbuilding did not respond to a query from Defense Daily about impacts to the OPC program from Hurricane Michael and any relief it may need from the current contract. Schultz said that the OPC contract can’t be renegotiated without legislative authorities from Congress. He said the Coast Guard, in response to an “ask” from Congress, provided language to help with drafting the proposed legislation related to the OPC in the disaster bill. Schultz also said that the Coast Guard is not involved in Eastern Shipbuilding’s lobbying efforts with Congress.80 A May 17, 2019, press report stated As the Senate continues to negotiate the particulars of the supplemental disaster relief bill that seems poised to go to a vote next week, a new provision to save something many likely didn’t know was at risk has been added. A new line in the draft bill will let Eastern Shipbuilding Group renegotiate its contract with the U.S. Coast Guard to build up to 25 new off-shore patrol cutters. “Under the old contract we were prohibited from negotiating for additional money for increased costs,” said Admiral Bob Papp, President of Washington Operations for Eastern. That meant that after Hurricane Michael, they would be unable to negotiate with the Coast Guard to help cover a slew of new costs associated with both the project and the hurricane, such as the damage from the Category 5 storm that needed repairs, the prolonged schedule 80 Calvin Biesecker, “Coast Guard Expects Impact To OPC Program From Hurricane Michael, Commandant Says,” Defense Daily, May 22, 2019. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 45 and the “skyrocketing” costs of labor, Papp said. The contract—the largest in the Coast Guard’s history at more than $10 billion—didn’t account for a natural disaster. It was going to be hard, Papp said, for Eastern to complete the project and to “stay healthy” without some negotiations. At stake in the community are 900 planned jobs and up to 5,000 indirect jobs officials believe will help jump-start the region’s manufacturing economy. But an official in Sen. Marco Rubio’s office said the latest version of the supplemental disaster relief bill now includes a provision that will allow negotiations. Rubio, according to the official, spoke with the President Donald Trump on Air Force One following the president’s rally in Panama City Beach last week, helping to secure the language that made it into the bill. “We’ve waited far too long (for disaster relief), and we’re also involved in some Florida-specific issues,” Rubio said in a recent video. “For example, the Hurricane had an impact on a very important Coast Guard project that’s in Northwest Florida and we want to make sure that project stays on target and continues to feed jobs because Northwest Florida desperately needs those jobs to recover. We’re very hopeful. Cautiously optimistic, that next week can be a very good week.” Papp thanked the area’s congressional delegation for stepping up to advocate for this project, saying the company is “honored and delighted” to receive help.81 A January 28, 2019, press release from Eastern Shipbuilding stated Panama City, FL, Eastern Shipbuilding Group [ESG] reports that steel cutting for the first offshore patrol cutter (OPC), Coast Guard Cutter ARGUS (WMSM-915), commenced on January 7, 2019 at Eastern’s facilities. ESG successfully achieved this milestone even with sustaining damage and work interruption due to Hurricane Michael. The cutting of steel will start the fabrication and assembly of the cutter’s hull, and ESG is to complete keel laying of ARGUS later this year. Additionally, ESG completed the placement of orders for all long lead time materials for OPC #2, Coast Guard Cutter CHASE (WMSM-916). Eastern’s President Mr. Joey D’Isernia noted the following: “Today represents a monumental day and reflects the dedication of our workforce - the ability to overcome and perform even under the most strenuous circumstances and impacts of Hurricane Michael. ESG families have been dramatically impacted by the storm, and we continue to recover and help rebuild our shipyard and community. I cannot overstate enough how appreciative we are of all of our subcontractors and vendors contributions to our families during the recovery as well as the support we have received from our community partners. Hurricane Michael may have left its marks but it only strengthened our resolve to build the most sophisticated, highly capable national assets for the Coast Guard. Today’s success is just the beginning of the construction of the OPCs at ESG by our dedicated team of shipbuilders and subcontractors for our customer and partner, the United States Coast Guard. We are excited for what will be a great 2019 for Eastern Shipbuilding Group and Bay County, Florida.”82 A November 1, 2018, statement from Eastern Shipbuilding states that the firm resumed operations at both of its two main shipbuilding facilities just two weeks after Hurricane Michael devastated Panama City Florida and the surrounding communities…. … the majority of ESG’s [Eastern Shipbuilding Group’s] workforce has returned to work very quickly despite the damage caused by the storm. “Our employees are a resourceful 81 Katie Landeck, “Provision Added to Disaster Relief Bill to Help Eastern Shipbuilding,” Panama City News Herald, May 17, 2019. 82 Eastern Shipbuilding press release entitled “Eastern Shipbuilding Group Announces Commencement of Steel Cutting for USCGC ARGUS (WMSM-915),” January 28, 2019, p. 1. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 46 and resilient group of individuals with the drive to succeed in the face of adversity. This has certainly been proven by their ability to bounce back over the two weeks following the storm. Our employees have returned to work much faster than anticipated and brought with them an unbreakable spirit, that I believe sets this shipyard and our community apart” said [Eastern Shipbuilding] President Joey D’Isernia. “Today, our staffing levels exceed 80% of our pre-Hurricane Michael levels and is rising daily.” Immediately following the storm, ESG set out on an aggressive initiative to locate all of its employees and help get them back on the job as soon as practical after they took necessary time to secure the safety and security of their family and home. Together with its network of friends, partners, and customers in the maritime community, ESG organized daily distribution of meals and goods to employees in need. Additionally, ESG created an interest free deferred payback loan program for those employees in need and has organized Go Fund Me account to help those employees hardest hit by the storm. ESG also knew temporary housing was going to be a necessity in the short term and immediately built a small community located on greenfield space near its facilities for those employees with temporary housing needs. ESG has worked closely with its federal, state and commercial partners over the past two weeks to provide updates on the shipyard as well as on projects currently under construction. Power was restored to ESG’s Nelson Facility on 10-21-18 and at ESG’s Allanton Facility on 10-24-18 and production of vessels under contract is ramping back up. Additionally, all of the ESG personnel currently working on the US Coast Guard’s Offshore Patrol Cutter contract have returned to work…. “We are grateful to our partners and the maritime business community as a whole for their support and confidence during the aftermath of this historic storm. Seeing our incredible employees get back to building ships last week was an inspiration,” said D’Isernia. “While there is no doubt that the effects of Hurricane Michael will linger with our community for years to come, I can say without reservation that we are open for business and excited about delivering quality vessels to our loyal customers.”83 An October 22, 2018, press report states the following: U.S. Coast Guard officials and Eastern Shipbuilding Group are still assessing the damage caused by deadly category 4 Hurricane Michael to the Panama City, Fla.-based yard contracted to build the new class of Offshore Patrol Cutters. On September 28, the Coast Guard awarded Eastern Shipbuilding a contract to build the future USCGC Argus (WMSM-915), the first offshore patrol cutter (OPC). The yard was also set to build a second OPC, the future USCGC Chase (WMSM-916). Eastern Shipbuilding’s contract is for nine OPCs, with options for two additional cutters. Ultimately, the Coast Guard plans to buy 25 OPCs. However, just as the yard was preparing to build Argus, Hurricane Michael struck the Florida Panhandle near Panama City on October 10. Workers from the shipyard and Coast Guard project managers evacuated and are just now returning to assess damage to the yard facilities, Brian Olexy, communications manager for the Coast Guard’s Acquisitions Directorate, told USNI News. “Right now we haven’t made any decisions yet on shifts in schedule,” Olexy said…. Since the yard was just the beginning stages of building Argus, Olexy said the hull wasn’t damaged. “No steel had been cut,” he said. 83 Eastern Shipbuilding news release, November 1, 2018, entitled “Eastern Shipbuilding Group, Inc. Resumes Operations.” Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 47 Eastern Shipbuilding is still in the process of assessing damage to the yard and trying to reach its workforce. Many employees evacuated the area and have not returned, or are in the area but lost their homes, Eastern Shipbuilding spokesman Justin Smith told USNI News. At first, about 200 workers returned to work, but by week’s end about 500 were at the yard, Smith said. The company is providing meals, water, and ice for its workforce. “Although we were significantly impacted by this catastrophic weather event, we are making great strides each day thanks to the strength and resiliency of our employees,” Joey D’Isernia, president of Eastern Shipbuilding, said in a statement.84 84 Ben Werner, “Coast Guard, Shipbuilder Assessing Hurricane Damage to Yard Building Offshore Patrol Cutter,” USNI News, October 22, 2018. See also Paul McLeary, “Hurricane Michael Hits Coast Guard’s Largest Program, Leaving Devastation,” Breaking Defense, October 18, 2018; Marex, “Despite Hurricane Michael, Eastern Shipbuilding Keeps Working,” Maritime Executive, October 16, 2018; Samuel Hill, “Eastern Shipbuilding Hit Hard by Hurricane Michael,” Workboat, October 16, 2018. Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 48 Appendix F. November 25, 2019, House Committee Letter Regarding OPC Program This appendix presents text from a November 25, 2019, letter to the Acting Secretary of DHS from the Chair and Ranking Member of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee and the Chair and Ranking Member of that committee’s Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation subcommittee regarding the OPC program. The letter states in part The Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure has reviewed your proposal to provide extraordinary relief under Public Law 85-804 as requested by Eastern Shipbuilding Group (ESG) for the construction of the Offshore Patrol Cutter (OPC). We are skeptical that such truly extraordinary relief is justified given that this “crisis” was foreseeable and mostly avoidable. Further, we are concerned that this relief sets a damaging precedent that any current or future contract with the United States Coast Guard (Coast Guard or Service) could be renegotiated outside the Federal Acquisition Regulations. As you know, the Coast Guard is in the middle of a rnulti-decade, multi-billion-dollar recapitalization of its cutter fleets. Last fall, the Service entered into a fixed price contract with ESG for the largest single acquisition in its history for the OPC. Shortly after entering into that contract, on October 10, 2018, Hurricane Michael hit the ESG shipyard and devastated the surrounding Panama City, Florida area where much of the shipyard workforce lived. The shipyard claims the impacts of the disaster rendered its facilities and workforce incapable of meeting the terms of the contract. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and the Service now propose to expand the timeframes for the delivery of each of the first four OPCs, spend up to an additional $659 million to complete those cutters, and then re-compete the contract earlier than previously planned. The decision to proceed with the current contractor raises a number of concerns for the Committee. Foremost among those concerns being the delay in delivering the cutters as well as the use of the Public Law No. 85-804 authority, which ultimately eliminates the Coast Guard’s claim of getting the best value through a firm, fixed-price contract. If that were a priority for the Service, it would make more sense to pivot to a contractor who had competed for the original contract and is positioned to execute on it rather than create continued uncertainty around the OPC. For more than a decade, the Committee has tracked the widening capability gap between the existing legacy fleet of Medium Endurance Cutters (MECs)—several built during the Vietnam War—and the commissioning of new OPCs. During that time, the Committee has repeatedly urged the Coast Guard to undertake a ship life extension program (SLEP) for the MECs and advocated for the Service to look at alternative methods to acquire new mission capabilities. Due to limited funding provided for the Coast Guard’s Procurement, Construction and Improvements account, the Service made the decision to defer initiating an MEC SLEP to partially offset the loss of MEC capability as those cutters aged out. Rather than heeding the Committee’s caution, the Service decided to prioritize construction of the OPCs at the earliest possible time to allow the Coast Guard to continue to effectively carry out its law enforcement, drug and migrant interdiction, and search and rescue missions. The Service then compounded the risks of this “all-or-nothing” strategy by entering into a contract with ESG; a company that has never built a ship for the Federal government and whose bid came in at a per-vessel price far below that of other qualified bidders. This action led many observers to question whether the Coast Guard was taking too great a risk, but the Service believed, nonetheless, that the risk was acceptable. Regrettably, ESG began lobbying lawmakers for “relief” from the contract barely six months after agreeing to its terms. Within nine months, ESG formally notified the Coast Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 49 Guard that they could no longer meet the contractual schedule or deliver the OPC at the contract price. In all, it appears the Coast Guard’s initial failure to adequately examine the risks of using a shipyard with no government shipbuilding experience could be perpetuated by DHS granting this extraordinary relief under Public Law No, 85-804. The Committee is concerned that the Coast Guard, along with DHS, embarked on exploring options to resuscitate ESG and prevent it from defaulting on the OPC contract without first completing a transparent and objective alternatives analysis. Additionally, the veil of secrecy regarding its analysis and the absence of any meaningful consultation by the Coast Guard and DHS with the Committee, provides us scant confidence that any revised OPC contract will not encounter a similar fate as the original contract. Accordingly, the Committee would like to know:  Why did the Coast Guard fail to stop construction on hull #1 as soon as they learned the contractor was informing lawmakers that it would be unable to meet the terms of the contract?  What interim measures are available to mitigate the lost mission capabilities while the OPC contract is being delayed and recompeted?  Is the Coast Guard considering the use of leased barges to support helicopter operations, the acquisition of additional National Security Cutters or Fast Response Cutters, or other available options?  What national security missions will be carried out by each of the four OPCs for which relief is sought?  What is the status of the ship life extension program for the 270B MECs? Regarding a revised OPC contract, the Committee would like to know?  Has the Department requested authority from Congress to expedite the re-compete of the OPC contract?  How will the Coast Guard ensure that no additional extraordinary relief will be needed beyond the potential upward limit of $659 million and the proposed schedule extensions?  Are the federal/non-federal share lines for each of the first four OPCs set in the DHS decision granting limited Public Law No. 85-804 extraordinary relief, and if not, what are these share lines and what is their justification request?  In which fiscal years will it be necessary to request funds above the amounts projected for the OPCs in the Coast Guard’s latest Capital Improvement Plan? In what amounts?  On what ship design will the re-compete be based?  Can you confirm that the Coast Guard owns the OPC design?  How many additional construction hours above the amount on which the initial bid was based are now anticipated for each of hulls #1-4?  What controls will be instituted to ensure that there is no excessive overage in production hours?  What conditions do the Coast Guard intend to include in a revised contract to ensure transparency in all financial transactions; accountability with all performance metrics and timetables for deliverables; certification and notification standards and protocols before the Coast Guard or DHS exercises an option on hulls #2-4? Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service R42567 · VERSION 119 · UPDATED 50  Given the fact that the contractor is unable to perform under the terms of the original contract, will any effort be made to receive the performance bond associated with the contract? The Committee will continue to investigate these issues and closely monitor this situation. We are concerned about the impacts any further delays of this contract will have on the Service’s ability to carry out its critical mission responsibilities and the overall impact the escalated cost of producing these assets will have on the Coast Guard’s Procurement, Construction and Improvements account for the foreseeable future. As we begin negotiations with the Senate on the Coast Guard Authorization Act of 2019, we will examine if further legislation is necessary to protect U.S. taxpayers from profligate, unwise spending, notwithstanding the urgent need to provide the Coast Guard with the modern assets it needs to remain the world’s preeminent Coast Guard.85 Author Information Ronald O'Rourke Specialist in Naval Affairs Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 85 The letter was accessed November 27, 2019, at https://transportation.house.gov/imo/media/doc/2019-11-25 DHS 85-804 Big 4 Letter.pdf. 		2020-05-06T09:22:21-0400
China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities—Background and Issues for Congress China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities—Background and Issues for Congress Updated April 24, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov RL33153 China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service Summary In an era of renewed great power competition, China’s military modernization effort, including its naval modernization effort, has become the top focus of U.S. defense planning and budgeting. China’s navy, which China has been steadily modernizing for more than 25 years, since the early to mid-1990s, has become a formidable military force within China’s near-seas region, and it is conducting a growing number of operations in more-distant waters, including the broader waters of the Western Pacific, the Indian Ocean, and waters around Europe. China’s navy is viewed as posing a major challenge to the U.S. Navy’s ability to achieve and maintain wartime control of blue-water ocean areas in the Western Pacific—the first such challenge the U.S. Navy has faced since the end of the Cold War—and forms a key element of a Chinese challenge to the long-standing status of the United States as the leading military power in the Western Pacific. China’s naval modernization effort encompasses a wide array of platform and weapon acquisition programs, including anti-ship ballistic missiles (ASBMs), anti-ship cruise missiles (ASCMs), submarines, surface ships, aircraft, unmanned vehicles (UVs), and supporting C4ISR (command and control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance) systems. China’s naval modernization effort also includes improvements in maintenance and logistics, doctrine, personnel quality, education and training, and exercises. China’s military modernization effort, including its naval modernization effort, is assessed as being aimed at developing capabilities for addressing the situation with Taiwan militarily, if need be; for achieving a greater degree of control or domination over China’s near-seas region, particularly the South China Sea; for enforcing China’s view that it has the right to regulate foreign military activities in its 200-mile maritime exclusive economic zone (EEZ); for defending China’s commercial sea lines of communication (SLOCs), particularly those linking China to the Persian Gulf; for displacing U.S. influence in the Western Pacific; and for asserting China’s status as the leading regional power and a major world power. Consistent with these goals, observers believe China wants its navy to be capable of acting as part of a Chinese anti-access/area-denial (A2/AD) force—a force that can deter U.S. intervention in a conflict in China’s near-seas region over Taiwan or some other issue, or failing that, delay the arrival or reduce the effectiveness of intervening U.S. forces. Additional missions for China’s navy include conducting maritime security (including antipiracy) operations, evacuating Chinese nationals from foreign countries when necessary, and conducting humanitarian assistance/disaster response (HA/DR) operations. The U.S. Navy in recent years has taken a number of actions to counter China’s naval modernization effort. Among other things, the U.S. Navy has shifted a greater percentage of its fleet to the Pacific; assigned its most-capable new ships and aircraft and its best personnel to the Pacific; maintained or increased general presence operations, training and developmental exercises, and engagement and cooperation with allied and other navies in the Indo-Pacific; increased the planned future size of the Navy; initiated, increased, or accelerated numerous programs for developing new military technologies and acquiring new ships, aircraft, unmanned vehicles, and weapons; begun development of new operational concepts (i.e., new ways to employ Navy and Marine Corps forces) for countering Chinese maritime A2/AD forces; and signaled that the Navy in coming years will shift to a more-distributed fleet architecture that will feature a smaller portion of larger ships, a larger portion of smaller ships, and a substantially greater use of unmanned vehicles. The issue for Congress is whether the U.S. Navy is responding appropriately to China’s naval modernization effort.China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Issue for Congress ..................................................................................................................... 1 Sources and Terminology .......................................................................................................... 1 Background ..................................................................................................................................... 2 Brief Overview of China’s Naval Modernization Effort ........................................................... 2 Selected Elements of China’s Naval Modernization Effort ...................................................... 4 Anti-Ship Missiles .............................................................................................................. 4 Submarines .......................................................................................................................... 6 Aircraft Carriers .................................................................................................................. 9 Surface Combatants .......................................................................................................... 13 Amphibious Ships ............................................................................................................. 17 Operations Away from Home Waters ................................................................................ 19 Numbers of Ships; Comparisons to U.S. Navy ....................................................................... 20 U.S. Navy Response ................................................................................................................ 23 Issues for Congress ........................................................................................................................ 25 Overview ........................................................................................................................... 25 Discussion ......................................................................................................................... 25 Legislative Activity for FY2021 .................................................................................................... 27 Coverage in Related CRS Reports .......................................................................................... 27 Figures Figure 1. DF-21D Anti-Ship Ballistic Missile (ASBM) .................................................................. 5 Figure 2. DF-26 Multi-Role Intermediate-Range Ballistic Missile (IRBM) ................................... 5 Figure 3. YJ-18 Anti-Ship Cruise Missile (ASCM) ........................................................................ 6 Figure 4. Yuan (Type 039) Attack Submarine (SS) ......................................................................... 7 Figure 5. Shang (Type 093) Attack Submarine (SSN) .................................................................... 8 Figure 6. Jin (Type 094) Ballistic Missile Submarine (SSBN) ....................................................... 8 Figure 7. Liaoning (Type 001) Aircraft Carrier ............................................................................. 10 Figure 8. Shandong (Type 001A) Aircraft Carrier ........................................................................ 10 Figure 9. Type 002 Aircraft Carrier Under Construction ............................................................... 11 Figure 10. J-15 Flying Shark Carrier-Capable Fighter .................................................................. 13 Figure 11. Renhai (Type 055) Cruiser (or Large Destroyer) ......................................................... 14 Figure 12. Luyang III (Type 052D) Destroyer .............................................................................. 15 Figure 13. Jiangkai II (Type 054A) Frigate .................................................................................. 16 Figure 14. Jingdao (Type 056) Corvette ....................................................................................... 16 Figure 15. Yuzhao (Type 071) Amphibious Ship ........................................................................... 18 Figure 16. Type 075 Amphibious Assault Ship ............................................................................. 18 Figure 17. Type 075 Amphibious Assault Ship ............................................................................. 19 Figure 18. Type 075 Amphibious Assault Ship ............................................................................. 20 China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service Tables Table 1. Numbers of Certain Types of Ships Since 2005 .............................................................. 22 Table 2. Numbers of Battle Force Ships, 2000-2030 .................................................................... 23 Appendixes Appendix A. Comparing U.S. and Chinese Naval Capabilities .................................................... 29 Appendix B. U.S. Navy’s Ability to Counter Chinese ASBMs .................................................... 32 Contacts Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 35 China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction Issue for Congress This report provides background information and issues for Congress on China’s naval modernization effort and its implications for U.S. Navy capabilities. (For an overview of China’s military as a whole, see CRS Report R44196, The Chinese Military: Overview and Issues for Congress, by Ian E. Rinehart.) In an era of renewed great power competition,1 China’s military modernization effort, including its naval modernization effort, has become the top focus of U.S. defense planning and budgeting.2 The issue for Congress for this CRS report is whether the U.S. Navy is responding appropriately to China’s naval modernization effort. Decisions that Congress reaches on this issue could affect U.S. and allied security, Navy capabilities and funding requirements, and the defense industrial base. Sources and Terminology This report is based on unclassified open-source information, such as the annual Department of Defense (DOD) report to Congress on military and security developments involving China,3 a 2019 Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) report on China’s military power,4 a 2015 Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI) report on China’s navy,5 published reference sources such as IHS Jane’s Fighting Ships,6 and press reports. For convenience, this report uses the term China’s naval modernization effort to refer to the modernization not only of China’s navy, but also of Chinese military forces outside China’s navy that can be used to counter U.S. naval forces operating in the Western Pacific, such as land-based anti-ship ballistic missiles (ASBMs), land-based surface-to-air missiles (SAMs), land-based Air Force aircraft armed with anti-ship cruise missiles (ASCMs), and land-based long-range radars for detecting and tracking ships at sea. 1 For further discussion of the shift to an era of renewed great power competition, see CRS Report R43838, Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 2 See, for example, Tom Rogan, “Defense Secretary Mark Esper: It's China, China, China,” Washington Examiner, August 28, 2019; Melissa Leon and Jennifer Griffin, “Pentagon 'Very Carefully' Watching China, It’s ‘No. 1 Priority,’ Defense Secretary Mark Esper Tells Fox News,” Fox News, August 22, 2019; Missy Ryan and Dan Lamothe, “Defense Secretary Wants to Deliver on the Goal of Outpacing China. Can He Do It?” Washington Post, August 6, 2019; Sandra Erwin, “New Pentagon Chief Shanahan Urges Focus on China and ‘Great Power Competition,’ Space News, January 2, 2019; Ryan Browne, “New Acting Secretary of Defense Tells Pentagon ‘to Remember China, China, China,’” CNN, January 2, 2019; Paul McCleary, “Acting SecDef Shanahan’s First Message: ‘China, China, China,’” Breaking Defense, January 2, 2019. 3 Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2019, May 12, 2019. Hereinafter 2019 DOD CMSD. 4 Defense Intelligence Agency, China Military Power, Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win, 2019, 125 pp. Hereinafter 2019 DIA CMP. 5 Office of Naval Intelligence, The PLA Navy, New Capabilities and Missions for the 21st Century, undated but released in April 2015, 47 pp. 6 Unless otherwise indicated, shipbuilding program information in this report is taken from IHS Jane’s Fighting Ships 2018-2019, and previous editions. Other sources of information on these shipbuilding programs may disagree regarding projected ship commissioning dates or other details, but sources present similar overall pictures regarding PLA Navy shipbuilding. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 2 China’s military is formally called the People’s Liberation Army (PLA). Its navy is called the PLA Navy, or PLAN (also abbreviated as PLA[N]), and its air force is called the PLA Air Force, or PLAAF. The PLA Navy includes an air component that is called the PLA Naval Air Force, or PLANAF. China refers to its ballistic missile force as the PLA Rocket Force (PLARF). This report uses the term China’s near-seas region to refer to the Yellow Sea, East China Sea, and South China Sea—the waters enclosed by the so-called first island chain. The so-called second island chain encloses both these waters and the Philippine Sea that is situated between the Philippines and Guam.7 Background Brief Overview of China’s Naval Modernization Effort Key overview points concerning China’s naval modernization effort include the following:  China’s naval modernization effort, which forms part of a broader Chinese military modernization effort that includes several additional areas of emphasis,8 has been underway for more than 25 years, since the early to mid-1990s, and has transformed China’s navy into a much more modern and capable force. China’s navy is a formidable military force within China’s near-seas region, and it is conducting a growing number of operations in more-distant waters, including the broader waters of the Western Pacific, the Indian Ocean, and waters around Europe.  China’s navy is, by far, the largest of any country in East Asia, and within the past few years it has surpassed the U.S. Navy in numbers of battle force ships, meaning the types of ships that count toward the quoted size of the U.S. Navy. ONI states that at the end of 2020, China’s will have 360 battle force ships, compared with a projected total of 297 for the U.S. Navy at the end of FY2020. ONI projects that China will have 400 battle force ships by 2025, and 425 by 2030.9  China’s naval ships, aircraft, and weapons are now much more modern and capable than they were at the start of the 1990s, and are now comparable in many respects to those of Western navies. ONI states that “Chinese naval ship design 7 For a map showing the first and second island chains, see 2019 DIA CMP, p. 32. 8 Other areas of emphasis in China’s military modernization effort include space capabilities, cyber and electronic warfare capabilities, ballistic missile forces, and aviation forces, as well as the development of emerging military-applicable technologies such as hypersonics, artificial intelligence, robotics and unmanned vehicles, directed-energy technologies, and quantum technologies. For an overview of China’s military as a whole, see CRS Report R44196, The Chinese Military: Overview and Issues for Congress, by Ian E. Rinehart. For a discussion of advanced military technologies, see CRS In Focus IF11105, Defense Primer: Emerging Technologies, by Kelley M. Sayler. U.S.-China competition in military capabilities in turn forms one dimension of a broader U.S.-China strategic competition that also includes political, diplomatic, economic, technological, and ideological dimensions. 9 Source for China’s number of battle force ships: Unclassified ONI information paper prepared for Senate Armed Services Committee, subject “UPDATED China: Naval Construction Trends vis-à-vis U.S. Navy Shipbuilding Plans, 2020-2030,” February 2020, p. 3. Provided by Senate Armed Services Committee to CRS and CBO on March 4, 2020, and used in this CRS report with the committee’s permission. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 3 and material quality is in many cases comparable to [that of] USN [U.S. Navy] ships, and China is quickly closing the gap in any areas of deficiency.”10  China’s navy is viewed as posing a major challenge to the U.S. Navy’s ability to achieve and maintain wartime control of blue-water ocean areas in the Western Pacific—the first such challenge the U.S. Navy has faced since the end of the Cold War. China’s navy forms a key element of a Chinese challenge to the long-standing status of the United States as the leading military power in the Western Pacific.  China’s naval modernization effort encompasses a wide array of platform and weapon acquisition programs, including anti-ship ballistic missiles (ASBMs), anti-ship cruise missiles (ASCMs), submarines, surface ships, aircraft, unmanned vehicles (UVs), and supporting C4ISR (command and control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance) systems. China’s naval modernization effort also includes improvements in maintenance and logistics, doctrine, personnel quality, education and training, and exercises.11  China’s military modernization effort, including its naval modernization effort, is assessed as being aimed at developing capabilities for addressing the situation with Taiwan militarily, if need be; for achieving a greater degree of control or domination over China’s near-seas region, particularly the South China Sea; for enforcing China’s view that it has the right to regulate foreign military activities in its 200-mile maritime exclusive economic zone (EEZ);12 for defending China’s commercial sea lines of communication (SLOCs), particularly those linking China to the Persian Gulf; for displacing U.S. influence in the Western Pacific; and for asserting China’s status as the leading regional power and a major world power.  Consistent with these goals, observers believe China wants its navy to be capable of acting as part of a Chinese anti-access/area-denial (A2/AD) force—a force that can deter U.S. intervention in a conflict in China’s near-seas region over Taiwan or some other issue, or failing that, delay the arrival or reduce the effectiveness of intervening U.S. forces. Additional missions for China’s navy include conducting maritime security (including antipiracy) operations, evacuating Chinese nationals from foreign countries when necessary, and conducting humanitarian assistance/ disaster response (HA/DR) operations.  Until recently, China’s naval modernization effort appeared to be focused less on increasing total platform (i.e., ship and aircraft) numbers than on increasing the modernity and capability of Chinese platforms. Some categories of ships, however, are now increasing in number. The planned ultimate size and composition of China’s navy is not publicly known. In contrast to the U.S. Navy, China does not release a navy force-level goal or detailed information about 10 Source: Unclassified ONI information paper prepared for Senate Armed Services Committee, subject “UPDATED China: Naval Construction Trends vis-à-vis U.S. Navy Shipbuilding Plans, 2020-2030,” February 2020, p. 3. Provided by Senate Armed Services Committee to CRS and CBO on March 4, 2020, and used in this CRS report with the committee’s permission. 11 See, for example, Roderick Lee, “The PLA Navy’s ZHANLAN Training Series: Supporting Offensive Strike on the High Seas,” China Brief, April 13, 2020. 12 For additional discussion, see CRS Report R42784, U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 4 planned ship procurement rates, planned total ship procurement quantities, planned ship retirements, and resulting projected force levels.  Although China’s naval modernization effort has substantially improved China’s naval capabilities in recent years, China’s navy currently is assessed as having limitations or weaknesses in certain areas, including joint operations with other parts of China’s military, antisubmarine warfare (ASW), long-range targeting, and a lack of recent combat experience. China is working to reduce or overcome such limitations and weaknesses.13 Although China’s navy has limitations and weaknesses, it may nevertheless be sufficient for performing missions of interest to Chinese leaders. As China’s navy reduces its weaknesses and limitations, it may become sufficient to perform a wider array of potential missions.  In addition to modernizing its navy, China in recent years has substantially increased the size of its coast guard.14 China’s coast guard is, by far, the largest of any country in East Asia. China also operates a sizeable maritime militia that includes a large number of fishing vessels. China relies primarily on its maritime militia and coast guard to assert and defend its maritime claims in its near-seas region, with the navy operating over the horizon as a potential backup force.15 Selected Elements of China’s Naval Modernization Effort This section provides a brief overview of elements of China’s naval modernization effort that have attracted frequent attention from observers. Anti-Ship Missiles China reportedly is fielding two types of land-based ballistic missiles with a capability of hitting ships at sea—the DF-21D (Figure 1), a road-mobile anti-ship ballistic missile (ASBM) with a range of more than 1,500 kilometers (i.e., more than 910 nautical miles), and the DF-26 (Figure 2), a road-mobile, multi-role intermediate range ballistic missile (IRBM) with a maximum range of about 4,000 kilometers (i.e., about 2,160 nautical miles) that DOD says “is capable of conducting conventional and nuclear precision strikes against ground targets as well as conventional strikes against naval targets....”16 China reportedly is also developing hypersonic glide vehicles that, if incorporated into Chinese ASBMs, could make Chinese ASBMs more difficult to intercept.17 13 For example, China’s naval shipbuilding programs were previously dependent on foreign suppliers for some ship components. ONI, however, states that “almost all weapons and sensors on Chinese naval ships are produced in-country, and China no longer relies on Russia or other countries for any significant naval ship systems.” (Source: Unclassified ONI information paper prepared for Senate Armed Services Committee, subject “UPDATED China: Naval Construction Trends vis-à-vis U.S. Navy Shipbuilding Plans, 2020-2030,” February 2020, pp. 2-3. Provided by Senate Armed Services Committee to CRS and CBO on March 4, 2020, and used in this CRS report with the committee’s permission.) 14 For additional details, see 2019 DOD CMSD, p. 53, and 2019 DIA CMP, p. 78. 15 For additional discussion, see CRS Report R42784, U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 16 2019 DOD CMSD, p. 44. 17 See, for example, Christian Davenport, “Why the Pentagon Fears the U.S. Is Losing the Hypersonic Arms Race with Russia and China,” Washington Post, June 8, 2018; Keith Button, “Hypersonic Weapons Race,” Aerospace America, June 2018. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 5 Figure 1. DF-21D Anti-Ship Ballistic Missile (ASBM) Source: Photograph accompanying Andrew S. Erickson, “China’s DF-21D Anti-Ship Ballistic Missile (ASBM)—Officially Revealed at 3 September Parade—Complete Open Source Research Compendium,” AndrewErickson.com, September 10, 2015, accessed August 28, 2019. Figure 2. DF-26 Multi-Role Intermediate-Range Ballistic Missile (IRBM) Source: Photograph accompanying Missile Defense Project, \"Dong Feng-26 (DF-26),\" Missile Threat, Center for Strategic and International Studies, January 8, 2018, last modified January 15, 2019, accessed August 28, 2019. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 6 Observers have expressed strong concerns about China’s ASBMs, because such missiles, in combination with broad-area maritime surveillance and targeting systems, would permit China to attack aircraft carriers, other U.S. Navy ships, or ships of allied or partner navies operating in the Western Pacific. The U.S. Navy has not previously faced a threat from highly accurate ballistic missiles capable of hitting moving ships at sea. For this reason, some observers have referred to ASBMs as a “game-changing” weapon. China’s extensive inventory of anti-ship cruise missiles (ASCMs) includes both Russian- and Chinese-made designs, including some advanced and highly capable ones, such as the Chinese-made YJ-18 (Figure 3). Although China’s ASCMs do not always receive as much press attention as China’s ASBMs (perhaps because ASBMs are a more-recent development), observers are nevertheless concerned about them. As discussed later in this report, the relatively long ranges of certain Chinese ASCMs have led to concerns among some observers that the U.S. Navy is not moving quickly enough to arm U.S. Navy surface ships with similarly ranged ASCMs. Figure 3. YJ-18 Anti-Ship Cruise Missile (ASCM) Source: Photograph accompanying “YJ-18,” Missile Defense Advocacy Alliance, undated, accessed August 28, 2019. Submarines China has been steadily modernizing its submarine force, and most of its submarines are now built to relatively modern Chinese and Russian designs. Qualitatively, China’s newest submarines might not be as capable as Russia’s newest submarines,18 but compared to China’s earlier submarines, which were built to antiquated designs, its newer submarines are much more capable. 18 Observers have sometimes characterized Russia’s submarines rather than China’s as being the most capable faced by the U.S. Navy. See, for example, Joe Gould and Aaron Mehta, “US Could Lose a Key Weapon for Tracking Chinese and Russian Subs,” Defense News, May 1, 2019; Dave Majumdar, “Why the U.S. Navy Fears Russia's Submarines,” National Interest, October 12, 2018; John Schaus, Lauren Dickey, and Andrew Metrick, “Asia’s Looming Subsurface Challenge,” War on the Rocks, August 11, 2016; Paul McLeary, “Chinese, Russian Subs Increasingly Worrying the Pentagon,” Foreign Policy, February 24, 2016; Dave Majumdar, “U.S. Navy Impressed with New Russian Attack Boat,” USNI News, October 28, 2014. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 7 Most of China’s submarines are non-nuclear-powered attack submarines (SSs). China also operates a small number of nuclear-powered attack submarines (SSNs) and a small number of nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs). The number of SSNs and SSBNs may grow in coming years, but the force will likely continue to consist mostly of SSs. DOD states that “The speed of growth of the submarine force has slowed and [the force] will likely grow to between 65 and 70 submarines by 2020.”19 DIA states that “By 2020 the submarine force probably will increase to about 70 submarines.”20 ONI states that “China’s submarine force continues to grow at a low rate, though with substantially more-capable submarines replacing older units. Current expansion at submarine production yards could allow higher future production numbers.” ONI projects that China’s submarine force will grow from a total of 66 boats (4 SSBNs, 7 SSNs, and 55 SSs) in 2020 to 76 boats (8 SSBNs, 13 SSNs, and 55 SSs) in 2030.21 China’s newest series-built SS design is the Yuan-class (Type 039) SS (Figure 4), its newest SSN class is the Shang-class (Type 093) SSN (Figure 5), and its newest SSBN class is the Jin (Type 094) class SSBN (Figure 6). ONI states that “nuclear submarines are solely produced at Huludao Shipyard and typically undergo two to four years of outfitting and sea-trials before becoming operational. Since 2006, eight nuclear submarines have reached IOC initial operational capability], for an average of one every 15 months…. Diesel-Electric submarines are produced at two shipyards and typically undergo approximately one year of outfitting and sea-trials before becoming operational.”22 Figure 4. Yuan (Type 039) Attack Submarine (SS) Source: Photograph accompanying “Type 039A Yuan class,” SinoDefence.com, July 10, 2018, accessed August 28, 2019. 19 2019 DOD CMSD, pp. 35-36. 20 2019 DIA CMP, p. 72. 21 Source: Unclassified ONI information paper prepared for Senate Armed Services Committee, subject “UPDATED China: Naval Construction Trends vis-à-vis U.S. Navy Shipbuilding Plans, 2020-2030,” February 2020, p. 1. Provided by Senate Armed Services Committee to CRS and CBO on March 4, 2020, and used in this CRS report with the committee’s permission. 22 Source: Unclassified ONI information paper prepared for Senate Armed Services Committee, subject “UPDATED China: Naval Construction Trends vis-à-vis U.S. Navy Shipbuilding Plans, 2020-2030,” February 2020, p. 3. Provided by Senate Armed Services Committee to CRS and CBO on March 4, 2020, and used in this CRS report with the committee’s permission. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 8 Figure 5. Shang (Type 093) Attack Submarine (SSN) Source: Photograph accompanying SinoDefence.com, “Type 093 Shang Class,” July 1, 2018, accessed August 27, 2019, at http://sinodefence.com/type093_shang-class/. Figure 6. Jin (Type 094) Ballistic Missile Submarine (SSBN) Source: Photograph accompanying Minnie Chan, “China Puts a Damper on Navy’s 70th Anniversary Celebrations As It Tries to Allay Fears Over Rising Strength,” South China Morning Post, April 23, 2019. The article credits the photograph to Xinhua. China’s submarines are armed with one or more of the following: ASCMs, wire-guided and wake-homing torpedoes, and mines. Wake-homing torpedoes can be very difficult for surface ships to decoy. Each Jin-class SSBN is expected to be armed with 12 JL-2 nuclear-armed China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 9 submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs).23 China reportedly is developing a new SLBM, called the JL-3, as a successor to the JL-2.24 Aircraft Carriers Overview China’s first aircraft carrier, Liaoning (Type 001) (Figure 7), entered service in 2012. China’s second aircraft carrier (and its first fully indigenously built carrier), Shandong (Type 001A) (Figure 8), entered service on December 17, 2019. China’s third carrier, the Type 002 (Figure 9), is under construction; ONI expects it to enter service by 2024.25 China’s fourth carrier, reportedly also to be built to the Type 002 design, reportedly may begin construction as early as 2021.26 The Type 002 carriers, like Liaoning and Shandong, are to be conventionally powered. ONI states that “China has two shipyards expected to be used for aircraft carrier production, though several other large commercial yards could, in theory, also build carriers.”27 Observers have speculated that China may eventually field a force of four to six (or possibly more than six) aircraft carriers. In late November 2019, it was reported that the Chinese government, while deciding to proceed with the construction of the fourth carrier, had put on hold plans to build a fifth carrier, known as the Type 003, which was to be nuclear-powered, due to budgetary and technical considerations.28 Observers expect that it will be some time before China masters carrier-based aircraft operations on a substantial scale. Liaoning (Type 001) Liaoning is a refurbished ex-Ukrainian aircraft carrier that China purchased from Ukraine in 1998 as an unfinished ship.29 It is conventionally powered, has an estimated full load displacement of 60,000 to 66,000 tons, and reportedly can accommodate an air wing of 30 or more fixed-wing 23 DOD estimates the range of the JL-2 at 7,400 km. Such a range could permit Jin-class SSBNs to attack targets in Alaska (except the Alaskan panhandle) from protected bastions close to China, targets in Hawaii (as well as targets in Alaska, except the Alaskan panhandle) from locations south of Japan, targets in the western half of the 48 contiguous states (as well as Hawaii and Alaska) from mid-ocean locations west of Hawaii, or targets in all 50 states from mid-ocean locations east of Hawaii. 24 2019 DOD CMSD, p. 36. 25 Source: Unclassified ONI information paper prepared for Senate Armed Services Committee, subject “UPDATED China: Naval Construction Trends vis-à-vis U.S. Navy Shipbuilding Plans, 2020-2030,” February 2020, p. 4. Provided by Senate Armed Services Committee to CRS and CBO on March 4, 2020, and used in this CRS report with the committee’s permission. 26 Minnie Chan, “Chinese Navy Set to Build Fourth Aircraft Carrier, but Plans for a More Advanced Ship Are Put on Hold,” South China Morning Post, November 28, 2019. 27 Source: Unclassified ONI information paper prepared for Senate Armed Services Committee, subject “UPDATED China: Naval Construction Trends vis-à-vis U.S. Navy Shipbuilding Plans, 2020-2030,” February 2020, p. 4. Provided by Senate Armed Services Committee to CRS and CBO on March 4, 2020, and used in this CRS report with the committee’s permission. 28 Minnie Chan, “Chinese Navy Set to Build Fourth Aircraft Carrier, but Plans for a More Advanced Ship Are Put on Hold,” South China Morning Post, November 28, 2019. See also Steven Stashwick, “Technical Problems, Slowing Economy Cut China’s Carrier Ambitions,” Diplomat, December 4, 2019; Sebastien Roblin, “China Cancels Plans for Two Nuclear-Powered Super Aircraft Carriers,” National Interest, December 7, 2019; Minnie Chan, “China’s Navy is Being Forced to Rethink Its Spending Plans as Cost of Trade War Rises,” South China Morning Post, May 26, 2019. 29 Prior to the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December 1991, Ukraine was a part of the Soviet Union and the place where the Soviet Union built its aircraft carriers. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 10 airplanes and helicopters, including 24 fighters. The Liaoning lacks aircraft catapults and instead launches fixed-wing airplanes off the ship’s bow using an inclined “ski ramp.” Figure 7. Liaoning (Type 001) Aircraft Carrier Source: Photograph accompanying China Power Team, “How Does China’s First Aircraft Carrier Stack Up?” China Power (Center for Strategic and International Studies), December 9, 2015, updated December 14, 2018, accessed August 28, 2019. Figure 8. Shandong (Type 001A) Aircraft Carrier Source: Photograph accompanying Daniel Brown, “China's Newest Aircraft Carrier Is Actually Very Outdated — But Its Next One Should Worry the US Navy A Lot,” Business Insider, July 18, 2018. The article credits the photograph to Reuters. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 11 Figure 9. Type 002 Aircraft Carrier Under Construction Source: Photograph accompanying China Power Team, “Tracking China’s Third Aircraft Carrier,” China Power. May 6, 2019, updated October 17, 2019, accessed November 18, 2019, at https://chinapower.csis.org/china-carrier-type-002/. By comparison, U.S. Navy aircraft carriers are nuclear powered (giving them greater cruising endurance than a conventionally powered ship), have a full load displacement of about 100,000 tons, can accommodate air wings of 60 or more aircraft, including fixed-wing aircraft and some helicopters, and launch their fixed-wing aircraft over both their bows and their angled decks using catapults, which can give those aircraft a range/payload capability greater than that of aircraft launched with a ski ramp. The Liaoning, like U.S. Navy aircraft carriers, lands fixed-wing aircraft using arresting wires on its angled deck. Some observers have referred to the Liaoning as China’s “starter” carrier. China has been using Liaoning in part for pilot training. In May 2018, China reportedly announced that the aircraft carrier group formed around Liaoning had reached initial operational capability (IOC),30 although that term might not mean the same as it does when used by DOD in connection with U.S. weapon systems. Shandong (Type 001A) Shandong is a modified version of the Liaoning design that incorporates some design improvements, including features that reportedly will permit it to embark and operate a larger air 30 Andrew Tate, “Liaoning Carrier Group Reaches Initial Operational Capability, IHS Jane’s Defence Weekly, June 4, 2018. See also Travis Fedschun, “China Says Carrier Group Reaches ‘Initial’ Combat Capability,” Fox News, May 31, 2018; “China’s First Aircraft Carrier Formation Capable of Systemic Combat Operation,” CGTV.com, May 31, 2018; Global Times, “Chinese Aircraft Carrier Forming All-Weather Combat Capability with Successful Night Takeoff and Landing,” People’s Daily Online, May 29, 2018. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 12 wing of 40 aircraft that includes 36 fighters.31 Its displacement is estimated at 66,000 to 70,000 tons. Type 002 Carriers Press reports state that the Type 002 carrier, the start of whose construction was announced in the Chinese press in November 2018,32 may have a displacement of 80,000 tons to 85,000 tons and that it will be equipped with electromagnetic catapults rather than a ski ramp, which will improve the range/payload capability of the fixed-wing aircraft that it operates. Type 003 Carrier A March 15, 2018, press report stated that following the Type 002 carrier design, China was to begin building a Type 003 carrier design that would displace 90,000 to 100,000 tons and, in addition to being equipped with electromagnetic catapults, be nuclear powered.33 As mentioned above, in late November 2019, it was reported that the Chinese government had put on hold plans to build this Type 003 design. Carrier-Based Aircraft China’s primary carrier-based fighter aircraft is the J-15 or Flying Shark (Figure 10), an aircraft derived from the Russian Su-33 Flanker aircraft design that can operate from carriers equipped with a ski ramp rather than catapults. China reportedly plans to develop a carrier-capable variant of its J-20 fifth-generation stealth fighter and/or a carrier-capable variant of its FC-31 fifth-generation stealth fighter to complement or succeed the J-15 on catapult-equipped Chinese carriers.34 China reportedly is also developing a carrier-based stealth drone aircraft.35 Roles and Missions Although aircraft carriers might have some value for China in Taiwan-related conflict scenarios, they are not considered critical for Chinese operations in such scenarios, because Taiwan is within range of land-based Chinese aircraft. Consequently, most observers believe that China is acquiring carriers primarily for their value in other kinds of operations, and to demonstrate China’s status as a leading regional power and major world power. Chinese aircraft carriers could 31 See, for example, Liu Xuanzun, “China’s Second Aircraft Carrier Can Carry 50% More Fighter Jets Than Its First,” Global Times, August 13, 2019; Liu Zhen, “China’s New Aircraft Carrier to Pack More Jet Power Than the Liaoning,” South China Morning Post, August 15, 2019. 32 See, for example, Zhao Lei, “China Launches Work on Third Aircraft Carrier, Xinhia Says,” China Daily, November 26, 2018; Liu Xuanzun (Global Times), “China’s 3rd Aircraft Carrier Under Construction, to Be Equipped with New Technologies, People’s Daily Online, November 27, 2018. 33 Jeffrey Lin and P.W. Singer, “A Chinese Shipbuilder Accidentally Revealed Its Major Navy Plans,” Popular Science, March 15, 2018. 34 See Caleb Larson, “FC-31: China’s Next Carrier Jet is Stolen and Stealthy,” National Interest, April 18, 2020; Sebastien Roblin, “China’s New Aircraft Carriers Are Getting Stealth Fighters,” National Interest, October 26, 2019; Rick Joe, “Beyond China’s J-20 Stealth Fighter,” Diplomat, September 20, 2019; Minnie Chan, “China’s Navy ‘Set to Pick J-20 Stealth Jets for Its Next Generation Carriers,’” South China Morning Post, August 27, 2019. 35 Minnie Chan, “China to Deploy Sharp Sword Stealth Drone for New Type 001A Aircraft Carrier,” South China Morning Post, September 17, 2019. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 13 be used for power-projection operations, particularly in scenarios that do not involve opposing U.S. forces, and to impress or intimidate foreign observers.36 Figure 10. J-15 Flying Shark Carrier-Capable Fighter Source: Photograph accompanying “China Developing Elite New Variants of the J-15 Flying Shark to Deploy from EMALS Equipped Future Carriers; Implications for the Balance of Power at Sea,” Military Watch Magazine, August 17, 2018, accessed August 28, 2019. Chinese aircraft carriers could also be used for humanitarian assistance and disaster relief (HA/DR) operations, maritime security operations (such as antipiracy operations), and noncombatant evacuation operations (NEOs). Politically, aircraft carriers could be particularly valuable to China for projecting an image of China as a major world power, because aircraft carriers are viewed by many as symbols of major world power status. In a combat situation involving opposing U.S. naval and air forces, Chinese aircraft carriers would be highly vulnerable to attack by U.S. ships and aircraft, but conducting such attacks could divert U.S. ships and aircraft from performing other missions in a conflict situation with China. Surface Combatants China since the early 1990s has put into service numerous new classes of indigenously built surface combatants, including a new cruiser (or large destroyer), several classes of destroyers and frigates, a new class of corvettes (i.e., light frigates), and a new class of missile-armed patrol craft. These new classes of surface combatants demonstrate a significant modernization of PLA Navy surface combatant technology. DOD states that China’s navy “remains engaged in a robust surface combatant construction program, producing new guided-missile cruisers (CG), guided-missile destroyers (DDG), and guided-missile frigates (FFG) which will significantly upgrade the 36 For a discussion, see, for example, Bryan McGrath and Seth Cropsey, “The Real Reason China Wants Aircraft Carriers, China’s Carrier Plans Target U.S. Alliances, Not Its Navy,” Real Clear Defense (www.realcleardefense.com), April 10, 2014; Sebastien Roblin, “All of the Reasons Why the World Should Fear China’s Aircraft Carriers,” National Interest, October 24, 2017. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 14 PLAN’s air defense, anti-ship, and anti-submarine capabilities.”37 DIA states that “the era of past designs has given way to production of modern multimission destroyer, frigate, and corvette classes as China’s technological advancement in naval design has begun to approach a level commensurate with, and in some cases exceeding, that of other modern navies.”38 China is building a new class of cruiser (or large destroyer), called the Renhai-class or Type 055 (Figure 11), that reportedly displaces between 10,000 and 13,000 tons. By way of comparison, the U.S. Navy’s Ticonderoga (CG-47) class cruisers and Arleigh Burke (DDG-51) class destroyers (aka the U.S. Navy’s Aegis cruisers and destroyers) displace about 10,100 tons and 9,300 tons, respectively, while the U.S. Navy’s three Zumwalt (DDG-1000) class destroyers displace about 15,600 tons. Figure 11. Renhai (Type 055) Cruiser (or Large Destroyer) Source: Photograph accompanying Kyle Mizokami, “Can the U.S. Navy Beat China’s New Type 055 Destroyer In a Fight?” National Interest, September 29, 2019. ONI states that Type 055 ships are being built by two shipyards, and that multiple ships in the class are currently under construction.39 The first Type 055 ship was reportedly commissioned into service on January 12, 2020, and the sixth was reportedly launched (i.e., put into the water for the final stages of construction) in December 2019.40 37 2019 DOD CMSD, p. 36. 38 2019 DIA CMP, p. 70. 39 Source: Unclassified ONI information paper prepared for Senate Armed Services Committee, subject “UPDATED China: Naval Construction Trends vis-à-vis U.S. Navy Shipbuilding Plans, 2020-2030,” February 2020, p. 4. Provided by Senate Armed Services Committee to CRS and CBO on March 4, 2020, and used in this CRS report with the committee’s permission. 40 Kristin Huang, “China Steps Up Warship Building Programme as Navy Looks to Extend Its Global Reach,” South China Morning Post, December 31, 2019. See also Liu Xuanzun, “Chinese Navy Commissions First Type 055 China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 15 China since the early 1990s has put into service multiple new classes of indigenously built destroyers, the most recent of which is the Luyang III (Type 052D) class (Figure 12), which displaces about 7,500 tons and is equipped with phased-array radars and vertical launch missile systems that outwardly are broadly similar to those on U.S. Navy cruisers and destroyers. Type 052D ships have been in serial production for some time, and the 23rd such ship was reportedly launched in December 2019.41 Figure 12. Luyang III (Type 052D) Destroyer Source: Photograph accompanying “Type 052D Luyang-III Class,” SinoDefence.com, September 3, 2017, accessed August 28, 2019. China since the early 1990s has also put into service multiple new classes of indigenously built frigates, the most recent of which is the Jiangkai II (Type 054A) class (Figure 13), which displaces about 4,000 tons. ONI states that 30 Type 054As entered service between 2008 and 2019, and that no additional Type 054As are currently under construction.42 Destroyer,” Global Times, January 12, 2020. Another press report states that eight Type 055 ships are expected to enter service over the next four years, and that more than two dozen such ships might be in service by the late 2020s. (Franz-Stefan Gady, “China’s Navy Commissions First-of-Class Type 055 Guided Missile Destroyer,” Diplomat, January 13, 2020.) 41 Kristin Huang, “China Steps Up warship Building Programme as Navy Looks to Extend Its Global Reach,” South China Morning Post, December 31, 2019. 42 Source: Unclassified ONI information paper prepared for Senate Armed Services Committee, subject “UPDATED China: Naval Construction Trends vis-à-vis U.S. Navy Shipbuilding Plans, 2020-2030,” February 2020, p. 4. Provided by Senate Armed Services Committee to CRS and CBO on March 4, 2020, and used in this CRS report with the committee’s permission. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 16 Figure 13. Jiangkai II (Type 054A) Frigate Source: Chinese Military Review, “Type 054A (Jiangkai II class) FFG-546 Yancheng Guided Missile Frigate in Mediterranean,” undated (but with a URL suggesting that it was posted in February of 2014), accessed August 29, 2018. Figure 14. Jingdao (Type 056) Corvette Source: Chinese Military Review, “Random Images of Chinese Type 056 Jiangdao Class Light Corvette,” undated (but with a URL suggesting that it was posted in October 2013), accessed August 29, 2018. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 17 China is also building a new type of corvette (i.e., a light frigate, or FFL) called the Jiangdao class or Type 056 (Figure 14), which displaces about 1,500 tons. Type 056 ships are being built at a high annual rate in four shipsyards. The first was commissioned in 2013. DOD states that “more than 40 of these corvettes entered service by the end of 2018, and more than a dozen more are currently under construction or outfitting.”43 The 42nd and 43rd were reportedly commissioned into service in December 2019.44 ONI states that as of February 2020, more than 50 had entered service and another 15 were under construction.45 Amphibious Ships China’s new Yuzhao or Type 071 amphibious ships (Figure 15) have an estimated displacement of more than 19,855 tons,46 compared to about 25,900 tons for the U.S. Navy’s new San Antonio (LPD-17) class amphibious ships. The fifth Type 071 ship was reportedly commissioned into service in September 2018, and at least two more reportedly are under construction. On September 25, 2019, China launched (i.e., put into the water for the final stages of its construction) the first of a new type of amphibious assault ship47 called the Type 075 (Figure 16, Figure 17, and Figure 18) that has an estimated displacement of 30,000 to 40,000 tons, compared to 41,000 to 45,000 tons for U.S. Navy LHA/LHD-type amphibious assault ships.48 On April 22, 2020, China launched the second ship in the class.49 ONI states that as of February 2020, three Type 075s, including the first one, were under construction.50 Although larger amphibious ships such as the Type 071 and Type 075 would be of value for conducting amphibious landings in Taiwan-related conflict scenarios, some observers believe that China is building such ships as much for their value in conducting other operations, such as operations for asserting and defending China’s claims in the South and East China Seas, 43 2019 DOD CMSD, p. 36. 44 Franz-Stefan Gady, “China’s People Liberation Army Navy Commissions 42nd and 43rd Type 056/056A Corvettes,” Diplomat, December 19, 2019. 45 Source: Unclassified ONI information paper prepared for Senate Armed Services Committee, subject “UPDATED China: Naval Construction Trends vis-à-vis U.S. Navy Shipbuilding Plans, 2020-2030,” February 2020, p. 4. Provided by Senate Armed Services Committee to CRS and CBO on March 4, 2020, and used in this CRS report with the committee’s permission. 46 Unless otherwise indicated, displacement figures cited in this report are full load displacements. IHS Jane’s Fighting Ships 2017-2018, p. 156, does not provide a full load displacement for the Type 071 class design. Instead, it provides a standard displacement of 19,855 tons. Full load displacement is larger than standard displacement, so the full load displacement of the Type 071 design is more than 19,855 tons. 47 Amphibious assault ships, also referred to as helicopter carriers or (in British parlance) commando carriers, look like medium-sized aircraft carriers. U.S. Navy amphibious assault ships are designated LHA or LHD. 48 See, for example, Rick Joe, “The Future of China’s Amphibious Assault Fleet,” Diplomat, July 17, 2019; Sebastien Roblin, “Bad News: China is Building Three Huge Helicopter ‘Aircraft Carriers,’” National Interest, July 27, 2019; Tyler Rogoway, “China’s New Amphibious Assault Ship Is A Monster,” The Drive, August 22, 2019; Mike Yeo, “Photos Reveal Progress on China’s Largest Amphibious Assault Ship,” Defense News, August 23, 2019. 49 Liu Zhen, “China Launches Second Type 075 Amphibious Helicopter Assault Ship,” South China Morning Post, April 23, 2020; Elizabeth Shim, “China Launches Second Type 075 Assault Ship,” UPI, April 22, 2020; Caleb Larson, “China Just Launched Their Second Type 075 Assault Carrier—Here’s Why Everyone Is Worried,” National Interest, April 22, 2020; Andrew Tate, “China’s Second Type 075 Amphibious Assault Ship Launched in Shanghai,” Jane’s, April 22, 2020. 50 Source: Unclassified ONI information paper prepared for Senate Armed Services Committee, subject “UPDATED China: Naval Construction Trends vis-à-vis U.S. Navy Shipbuilding Plans, 2020-2030,” February 2020, p. 4. Provided by Senate Armed Services Committee to CRS and CBO on March 4, 2020, and used in this CRS report with the committee’s permission. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 18 humanitarian assistance/disaster relief (HA/DR) operations, maritime security operations (such as antipiracy operations), and noncombatant evacuation operations (NEOs). Politically, amphibious ships can also be used for naval diplomacy (i.e., port calls and engagement activities) and for impressing or intimidating foreign observers.51 Figure 15. Yuzhao (Type 071) Amphibious Ship Source: Chinese Military Review, “Jinggang Shan (999) Type 071 YUZHAO Class Amphibious Transport Dock,” undated (but with a URL suggesting that it was posted in February 2012), accessed August 29, 2018. Figure 16. Type 075 Amphibious Assault Ship Source: Photograph accompanying David Axe, “China Is Finishing Its First Large Helicopter Assault Ship,” National Interest, October 29, 2019. 51 See, for example, Grant Newsham, “China’s Amphibious Force Emerges,” Asia Times, November 5, 2019. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 19 Figure 17. Type 075 Amphibious Assault Ship Source: Photograph accompanying David Axe, “Meet the Type 075 LHD: China's New Assault Ship,” National Interest, December 11, 2019. Operations Away from Home Waters Although China’s navy operates primarily in China’s home waters, Chinese navy ships are conducting increasing numbers of operations away from China’s home waters, including the broader waters of the Western Pacific, the Indian Ocean, and the waters surrounding Europe, including the Mediterranean Sea and the Baltic Sea. A November 23, 2019, DOD news report quoted Admiral Philip Davidson, the commander of the U.S. Indo-Pacific Command, as stating that China’s navy had conducted more global naval deployments in the past 30 months than it had in the previous 30 years.52 While many of China’s long-distance naval deployments have been for making diplomatic port calls, some of them have been for other purposes, including conducting training exercises and carrying out antipiracy operations in waters off Somalia. China has been conducting antipiracy operations in waters off Somalia since December 2008 via a succession of more than 30 rotationally deployed naval escort task forces. 52 David Vergun, “Freedom of Navigation in South China Sea Critical to Prosperity, Says Indo-Pacific Commander,” DOD News, November 23, 2019. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 20 Figure 18. Type 075 Amphibious Assault Ship Source: Photograph accompanying Joseph Trevithick and Tyler Rogoway, “China Just Launched Its Huge And Incredibly Quickly Built Amphibious Assault Ship,” The Drive, September 25, 2019. The caption to the photograph credits the photograph to “Chinese internet.” Numbers of Ships; Comparisons to U.S. Navy The planned ultimate size and composition of China’s navy is not publicly known. The U.S. Navy makes public its force-level goal and regularly releases a 30-year shipbuilding plan that shows planned procurements of new ships, planned retirements of existing ships, and resulting projected force levels, as well as a five-year shipbuilding plan that shows, in greater detail, the first five years of the 30-year shipbuilding plan.53 In contrast, China does not release a navy force-level goal or detailed information about planned ship procurement rates, planned total ship procurement quantities, planned ship retirements, and resulting projected force levels. It is 53 For more information on the U.S. Navy’s force-level goal, 30-year shipbuilding plan, and five-year shipbuilding plan, see CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 21 possible that the ultimate size and composition of China’s navy is an unsettled and evolving issue even among Chinese military and political leaders. Table 1 shows numbers of certain types of Chinese navy ships from 2005 to the present (and the number of China coast guard ships from 2017 to the present) as presented in DOD’s annual reports on military and security developments involving China. DOD states that China’s navy “is the region’s largest navy, with more than 300 surface combatants, submarines, amphibious ships, patrol craft, and specialized types.”54 DIA states that “although the overall inventory has remained relatively constant, the PLAN is rapidly retiring older, single-mission warships in favor of larger, multimission ships equipped with advanced antiship, antiair, and antisubmarine weapons and sensors and C2 [command and control] facilities.”55 As can be seen in Table 1, about 65% of the increase since 2005 in the number of Chinese navy ships shown in the table (a net increase of 77 ships out of a total net increase of 119 ships) resulted from increases in missile-armed fast patrol craft starting in 2009 (a net increase of 35 ships) and corvettes starting in 2014 (42 ships). These are the smallest surface combatants shown in the table. The net 35-ship increase in missile-armed fast patrol craft was due to the construction between 2004 and 2009 of 60 new Houbei (Type 022) fast attack craft56 and the retirement of 25 older fast attack craft that were replaced by Type 022 craft. The 42-ship increase in corvettes is due to the Jingdao (Type 056) corvette program discussed earlier. ONI states that “a significant portion of China’s Battle Force consists of the large number of new corvettes and guided-missile frigates recently built for the PLAN.”57 As can also be seen in the table, most of the remaining increase since 2005 in the number of Chinese navy ships shown in the table is accounted for by increases in destroyers (12 ships), frigates (11 ships), and amphibious ships (17 ships). Most of the increase in frigates occurred in the earlier years of the table; the number of frigates has changed little in the later years of the table. Table 1 lumps together less-capable older Chinese ships with more-capable modern Chinese ships. Thus, in examining the numbers in the table, it can be helpful to keep in mind that for many of the types of Chinese ships shown in the table, the percentage of the ships accounted for by more-capable modern designs was growing over time, even if the total number of ships for those types was changing little. For reference, Table 1 also shows the total number of ships in the U.S. Navy (known technically as the total number of battle force ships), and compares it to the total number of Chinese ships shown in the table. The result is an apples-vs.-oranges comparison, because the Chinese figure excludes certain ship types, such as auxiliary and support ships, while the U.S. Navy figure includes auxiliary and support ships but excludes patrol craft. 54 2019 DOD CMSD, p. 35. A similar statement is in 2019 DIA CMP, p. 63. 55 2019 DIA CMP, p. 69. 56 The Type 022 program was discussed in the August 1, 2018, version of this CRS report, and earlier versions. 57 Source: Unclassified ONI information paper prepared for Senate Armed Services Committee, subject “UPDATED China: Naval Construction Trends vis-à-vis U.S. Navy Shipbuilding Plans, 2020-2030,” February 2020, p. 4. Provided by Senate Armed Services Committee to CRS and CBO on March 4, 2020, and used in this CRS report with the committee’s permission. CRS-22 Table 1. Numbers of Certain Types of Ships Since 2005 (Figures include both less-capable older units and more-capable newer units) Year of DOD report 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2019 change from 2005 Ballistic missile submarines 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 +3 Nuclear-powered attack submarines 6 5 5 5 6 6 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 6 0 Diesel attack submarines 51 50 53 54 54 54 49 48 49 51 53 57 54 47 50 -1 Aircraft carriers 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 +1 Destroyers 21 25 25 29 27 25 26 26 23 24 21 23 31 28 33 +12 Frigates 43 45 47 45 48 49 53 53 52 49 52 52 56 51 54 +11 Corvettes 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 15 23 23 28 42 +42 Missile-armed coastal patrol craft 51 45 41 45 70 85 86 86 85 85 86 86 88 86 86 +35 Amphibious ships: LSTs and LPDs 20 25 25 26 27 27 27 28 29 29 29 30 34 33 37 +17 Amphibious ships: LSMs 23 25 25 28 28 28 28 23 26 28 28 22 21 23 22 -1 Total of types above (does not include other types, such as auxiliary and support ships) 216 221 222 233 262 276 276 271 273 283 294 303 317 306 335 +119 China Coast Guard ships n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 185 240 248 n/a Total U.S. Navy battle force ships (which includes auxiliary and support ships but excludes patrol craft) 291 282 281 279 282 285 288 284 287 285 289 271 275 279 286 -5 U.S. Navy figure compared to above total for certain Chinese ship types +75 +61 +59 +46 +20 +9 +12 +13 +14 +2 -5 -32 -42 -27 -49 -124 Source: Table prepared by CRS based on 2005-2019 editions of annual DOD report to Congress on military and security developments involving China (known for 2009 and prior editions as the report on China military power), and (for U.S. Navy ships) U.S. Navy data as presented in CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Notes: n/a means data not available in report. LST means tank landing ship; LPD means transport dock ship; LSM means medium landing ship. The DOD report generally covers events of the prior calendar year. Thus, the 2019 edition covers events during 2018, and so on for earlier years. Similarly, for the U.S. Navy figures, the 2019 column shows the figure for the end of FY2018, and so on for earlier years. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 23 Table 2 shows comparative numbers of Chinese and U.S. battle force ships. Battle force ship are the types of ships that count toward the quoted size of the Navy. For China, the battle force ships total excludes the missile-armed coastal patrol craft shown in Table 1, but includes auxiliary and support ships that are not shown in Table 1. Compared to the comparison shown in Table 1, the comparison Table 2 is closer to being an apples-to-apples comparison of the two navies’ numbers of ships. Even so, it is important to keep in mind the differences in composition between the two navies. The U.S. Navy, for example, has many more aircraft carriers, nuclear-powered submarines, and cruisers and destroyers, while China’s navy has many more diesel attack submarines, frigates, and corvettes. Table 2. Numbers of Battle Force Ships, 2000-2030 Figures include both less-capable older units and more-capable newer units 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 Ballistic missile submarines 1 1 3 4 4 6 8 Nuclear-powered attack submarines 5 4 5 6 7 10 13 Diesel attack submarines 56 56 48 53 55 55 55 Aircraft carriers, cruisers, destroyers 19 25 25 26 43 55 65 Frigates, corvettes 38 43 50 74 102 120 135 Total China navy battle force ships, including types not shown above 110 220 220 255 360 400 425 Total U.S. Navy battle force ships 318 282 288 271 297 n/a n/a Source: Table prepared by CRS. Source for China’s navy: Unclassified ONI information paper prepared for Senate Armed Services Committee, subject “UPDATED China: Naval Construction Trends vis-à-vis U.S. Navy Shipbuilding Plans, 2020-2030,” February 2020, 4 pp. Provided by Senate Armed Services Committee to CRS and CBO on March 4, 2020, and used in this CRS report with the committee’s permission. Figures are for end of calendar year. Source for figures for U.S. Navy: U.S. Navy data; figures are for end of fiscal year. Note: n/a means not available. Relative U.S. and Chinese naval capabilities are sometimes assessed by showing comparative numbers of U.S. and Chinese ships. Although the total number of ships in a navy (or its aggregate tonnage) is relatively easy to calculate, it is a one-dimensional measure that leaves out numerous other factors that bear on a navy’s capabilities and how those capabilities compare to its assigned missions. As a result, as discussed in further detail in Appendix A, comparisons of the total numbers of ships in the PLAN and the U.S. Navy are highly problematic as a means of assessing relative U.S. and Chinese naval capabilities and how those capabilities compare to the missions assigned to those navies. At the same time however, an examination of the trends over time in the relative numbers of ships can shed some light on how the relative balance of U.S. and Chinese naval capabilities might be changing over time. U.S. Navy Response The U.S. Navy in recent years has taken a number of actions to counter China’s naval modernization effort. Among other things, the U.S. Navy has  shifted a greater percentage of its fleet to the Pacific;58 58 Efforts in this regard began at least as far back as 2006: The final report on the 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 24  assigned its most capable new ships and aircraft and its best personnel to the Pacific;  maintained or increased general presence operations, training and developmental exercises, and engagement and cooperation with allied and other navies in the Indo-Pacific;  increased the planned future size of the Navy;  initiated, increased, or accelerated numerous programs for developing new military technologies and acquiring new ships, aircraft, unmanned vehicles, and weapons;  begun development of new operational concepts (i.e., new ways to employ Navy and Marine Corps forces) for countering Chinese maritime A2/AD forces; and  signaled that the Navy in coming years will shift to a more distributed fleet architecture that will feature a smaller portion of larger ships, a larger portion of smaller ships, and a substantially greater use of unmanned vehicles. U.S. Navy efforts to increase cooperation with naval forces from allies and other countries such as Japan, Australia, and India appear aimed in part at expanding existing bilateral forms of naval cooperation (e.g., U.S.-Japan, U.S.-Australia, U.S.-India) into trilateral (e.g., U.S.-Japan-Australia, U.S.-Australia-India) or quadrilateral (U.S.-Japan-Australia-India) forms that could support the Trump Administration’s overarching security and foreign policy construct for the Indo-Pacific region, called the Free and Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP).59 The increase in the planned size of the Navy is detailed in detail in another CRS report.60 Many of the Navy’s programs for acquiring highly capable ships, aircraft, and weapon systems can be viewed as intended, at least in part, at improving the U.S. Navy’s ability to counter Chinese maritime A2/AD capabilities. Examples of new technologies being developed by the Navy that might be of value in countering Chinese maritime A2/AD capabilities include large unmanned vehicles,61 lasers, the electromagnetic rail gun (EMRG), and the gun-launched guided projectile (aka hypervelocity projectile).62 Navy and Marine Corps efforts to develop new operational concepts such as Distributed Maritime Operations (DMO) and Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations (EABO), and to shift to a more distributed fleet architecture, are discussed in detail in other CRS reports.63 (QDR) directed the Navy “to adjust its force posture and basing to provide at least six operationally available and sustainable carriers and 60% of its submarines in the Pacific to support engagement, presence and deterrence.” (U.S. Department of Defense, Quadrennial Defense Review Report. Washington, 2006. February 6, 2006, p. 47.) Subsequent to this directive, the Navy announced an intention to increase to 60% (from a starting point of about 55%) the percentage of the fleet as a whole that is assigned to the Pacific. 59 For more on the FOIP, see CRS Report R45396, The Trump Administration’s “Free and Open Indo-Pacific”: Issues for Congress, coordinated by Bruce Vaughn. 60 See CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 61 For more on these efforts, see CRS Report R45757, Navy Large Unmanned Surface and Undersea Vehicles: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 62 For more on these efforts, see CRS Report R44175, Navy Lasers, Railgun, and Gun-Launched Guided Projectile: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 63 See CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke, and CRS Report R45757, Navy Large Unmanned Surface and Undersea Vehicles: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 25 Issues for Congress Overview The overall issue for Congress is whether the U.S. Navy is responding appropriately to China’s naval modernization effort. Within this overall issue, specific issues include the following:  the current and potential future U.S.-China balance of naval power in general, and in specific geographic areas, particularly the South China Sea;  whether the planned size of the Navy will be appropriate for countering China’s naval modernization effort in coming years while also permitting the Navy to perform other missions, including countering Russian military forces and defending U.S. interests in the Middle East;  whether the Navy should shift to a more-distributed fleet architecture so as to improve the Navy’s ability to avoid and withstand attack from Chinese maritime A2/AD forces—and if so, what that new architecture should look like, and how quickly the Navy should shift to it;  whether the Navy is doing enough to  improve its ability to counter China’s ASBMs or some of China’s other maritime A2/AD weapons, such as its wake-homing torpedoes;  develop and procure new ASCMs with ranges that match or exceed those of China’s longer-ranged ASCMs;  increase the operating range of Navy carrier air wings, so as to improve the ability of carriers and their air wings to achieve effects while operating at longer distances from Chinese ASBMs and other A2/AD weapons; and  whether Congress should modify acquisition policies or the metrics for judging the success of acquisition programs so as to facilitate faster development of new technologies and weapons for the Navy—and if so, how those policies or metrics should be modified. Discussion Regarding the U.S.-China balance of naval power in general, U.S. and other observers generally assess that while the United States today has more naval capability overall, China’s naval modernization effort since the 1990s has substantially reduced the U.S. advantage, and that if current U.S. and Chinese naval capability trend lines (such as those shown in Table 1 and Table 2) do not change, China might eventually draw even with or surpass the United States in overall naval capability. Regarding the current U.S.-China naval balance of power specifically in the South China Sea, some observers are concerned that China has already drawn even with or even surpassed the United States. U.S. Navy Admiral Philip Davidson, in responses to advance policy questions from the Senate Armed Services Committee for an April 17, 2018, hearing before the committee to consider nominations, including Davidson’s nomination to become Commander, U.S. Pacific Command (PACOM),64 stated that “China is now capable of controlling the South China Sea in 64 The name of the command has since been changed to the U.S. Indo-Pacific Command (INDOPACOM). China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 26 all scenarios short of war with the United States.”65 A January 18, 2020, press report quotes James Kraska of the Naval War College as stating that “the US has lost advantage throughout the spectrum of operations, from low-level interaction against China’s maritime militia to higher-end conflict scenarios,” and that “in other words, China has escalation dominance, because it has the power to deter any US turn towards escalation. The US is outmatched in all of the scenarios.”66 Skeptics of assessments like those above might argue that they do not give adequate weight to relative U.S. strengths (and corresponding Chinese relative weaknesses and limitations) in areas such as undersea warfare; personnel quality, training, and initiative; operational experience (particularly in combat situations); joint operations with other U.S. military services; and potential support from allies and partners, particularly Japan and Australia. The above-listed issues of the planned size of the Navy and the shift to a more-distributed fleet architecture are discussed in detail in other CRS reports.67 The issue of the Navy’s ability to counter China’s ASBMs is discussed in detail in this report in Appendix B. The issue of the Navy’s ability to counter wake-homing torpedoes may have been made more pressing by the reportedly poor performance of an anti-torpedo torpedo that the Navy was developing as a means for Navy surface ships to counter hard-to-decoy wake-homing torpedoes and other torpedoes. The Navy now reportedly plans to remove the anti-torpedo torpedo system from the ships that were equipped with it.68 The Navy in recent years has initiated efforts to develop and procure longer-ranged ASCMs, but some observers have expressed frustration that these efforts are not moving quickly enough.69 In support of its efforts, the Navy testified in March 2020 that The Navy’s offensive strike systems consist of a broad family of current and future weapons that together can and will strike from the sea, air, and land. These weapons capitalize on key system attributes (e.g. speed, range, lethality, survivability, and commonality) with a strong focus on delivering ‘multi-domain’ capabilities. The [Navy] Department’s Offensive Missile Strategy (OMS) supports a wider, more systematic approach towards delivering offensive weapons balance to increase overall force effectiveness to address emerging threats. Our current OMS construct has three pillars. First, the Department will sustain relevant weapon systems. Our objective is to preserve the readiness and capacity of our key strike weapons inventories. Second, the Department will pursue strike weapon capability enhancements. Under this initiative, the Navy will develop near-term capability upgrades to enhance existing weapons that provide critical improvements to our current long-range 65 Advance Policy Questions for Admiral Philip Davidson, USN Expected Nominee for Commander, U.S. Pacific Command, p. 18. See also pp. 8. 16. 17. 19, and 43. 66 John Power, “Has the US Already Lost the Battle for the South China Sea?” South China Morning Post, January 18, 2020. See also Gregory B. Poling, “The Conventional Wisdom on China’s Island Bases Is Dangerously Wrong,” War on the Rocks, January 10, 2020; Kerry K. Gershaneck and James E. Fanell, “This Is How China's [Military] Will Fight And Win A War In The South China Sea,” National Interest, January 18, 2020. 67 See CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke, and CRS Report R45757, Navy Large Unmanned Surface and Undersea Vehicles: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 68 For additional discussion, see Alex Lockie, “US Navy Admits Failure on $760 Million Weapon to Protect Its Aircraft Carriers from An Age-Old Threat,” Business Insider, February 5, 2019; Joseph Trevithick, “The Navy Is Ripping Out Underperforming Anti-Torpedo Torpedoes From Its Supercarriers,” The Drive, February 5, 2019. 69 See, for example, James Turnwall, “The Navy Is Losing the Missile Arms Race,” U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, November 2019. For a similar discussion regarding U.S. and Chinese air-to-air missiles, see Douglas Barrie, “Will America’s Next Long-Range Ait-to-Air Missile Match Up to China’s?” Defense One, October 22, 2019. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 27 strike weapons capabilities (e.g. Maritime Strike Tomahawk (MST), LRASM V1.1, SM-6/Block 1B, and the Naval Strike Missile). Third, the Department will develop next-generation strike missile capabilities to address emerging threats. The OMS is reviewed annually based on current capabilities and emerging threats, and updated to leverage analytical processes/study updates. The results are used to inform annual RDT&E and procurement funding priorities to achieve an optimal mix of offensive strike missile system capabilities. The 2020 OMS is currently being finalized and is a classified document. Additional details about next generation weapons development can be provided in a classified setting.70 The issue of the operating range of Navy carrier air wings is a key component of an ongoing debate over the future survivability, utility, and cost-effectiveness of aircraft carriers and their air wings, with critics arguing that the current operating range of Navy carrier air wings will force Navy aircraft carriers to operate well within the ranges of Chinese ASBMs or other A2/AD systems, which could put the carriers’ survivability at substantial risk, or alternatively require carriers to operate beyond the range of those Chinese A2/AD systems, in locations that are safer but so far away that the carriers and their air wings will contribute little combat capability. A key U.S. Navy program for increasing the operating range of Navy carrier air wings is the MQ-25 Stingray program, which is a program to acquire a carrier-based unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) for use as a tanker for in-flight refueling of manned carrier-based aircraft (with a secondary mission of intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance). Some observers, while not necessarily objecting to the MQ-25 program, argue that the Navy should do more to increase the operating range of Navy carrier air wings, such as developing a stealthy, carrier-based UAV capable of penetrating enemy air defenses and striking land targets at very long ranges. The issue of acquisition policies and the metrics for judging their success is discussed in more detail in another CRS report.71 Legislative Activity for FY2021 The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget was submitted on February 10, 2020. Coverage in Related CRS Reports A variety of CRS reports cover U.S. Navy programs that in varying degrees can be viewed as responses to, among other things, China’s naval modernization effort. These reports include but are not limited to the following:  CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke  CRS Report RS20643, Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke 70 Statement of the Honorable James F. Geurts, Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Research, Development and Acquisition ASN(RD&A), and Vice Admiral James W. Kilby, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations, Warfighting Requirements and Capabilities (OPNAV N9), and Lieutenant General Eric Smith, Deputy Commandant, Combat Development and Integration, Commanding General, Marine Corps Combat Development Command, before the Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces of the House Armed Services Committee on the Department of the Navy Fiscal Year 2021 Budget Rrequest for Seapower and Projection Forces, March 4, 2020, p. 20. 71 See CRS Report R43838, Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 28  CRS Report RL30563, F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program, by Jeremiah Gertler (the JSF program is a joint DOD program with Navy participation)  CRS Report RL32418, Navy Virginia (SSN-774) Class Attack Submarine Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke  CRS Report RL32109, Navy DDG-51 and DDG-1000 Destroyer Programs: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke  CRS Report R44972, Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke  CRS Report RL33745, Navy Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke  CRS Report R44175, Navy Lasers, Railgun, and Gun-Launched Guided Projectile: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke  CRS Report R45757, Navy Large Unmanned Surface and Undersea Vehicles: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 29 Appendix A. Comparing U.S. and Chinese Naval Capabilities This appendix presents some additional discussion of factors involved in comparing U.S. and Chinese naval capabilities. U.S. and Chinese naval capabilities are sometimes compared by showing comparative numbers of U.S. and Chinese ships. Although the total number of ships in a navy (or its aggregate tonnage) is relatively easy to calculate, it is a one-dimensional measure that leaves out numerous other factors that bear on a navy’s capabilities and how those capabilities compare to its assigned missions. One-dimensional comparisons of the total numbers of ships in China’s navy and the U.S. Navy are highly problematic as a means of assessing relative U.S. and Chinese naval capabilities and how those capabilities compare to the missions assigned to those navies, for the following reasons:  A fleet’s total number of ships (or its aggregate tonnage) is only a partial metric of its capability. Many factors other than ship numbers (or aggregate tonnage) contribute to naval capability, including types of ships, types and numbers of aircraft, the sophistication of sensors, weapons, C4ISR systems, and networking capabilities, supporting maintenance and logistics capabilities, doctrine and tactics, the quality, education, and training of personnel, and the realism and complexity of exercises. In light of this, navies with similar numbers of ships or similar aggregate tonnages can have significantly different capabilities, and navy-to-navy comparisons of numbers of ships or aggregate tonnages can provide a highly inaccurate sense of their relative capabilities. In recent years, the warfighting capabilities of navies have derived increasingly from the sophistication of their internal electronics and software. This factor can vary greatly from one navy to the next, and often cannot be easily assessed by outside observation. As the importance of internal electronics and software has grown, the idea of comparing the warfighting capabilities of navies principally on the basis of easily observed factors such as ship numbers and tonnages has become increasingly less reliable, and today is highly problematic.  Total numbers of ships of a given type (such as submarines or surface combatants) can obscure potentially significant differences in the capabilities of those ships, both between navies and within one country’s navy. Differences in capabilities of ships of a given type can arise from a number of other factors, including sensors, weapons, C4ISR systems, networking capabilities, stealth features, damage-control features, cruising range, maximum speed, and reliability and maintainability (which can affect the amount of time the ship is available for operation).  A focus on total ship numbers reinforces the notion that changes in total numbers necessarily translate into corresponding or proportional changes in aggregate capability. For a Navy like China’s, which is modernizing by replacing older, obsolescent ships with more modern and more capable ships, this is not necessarily the case. As shown in Table 1 and Table 2, for example, China’s attack submarine force today has only a slightly larger number of boats than it had in 2000 or 2005, but it has considerably more aggregate capability than it did in 2000 or 2005, because the force today includes a much larger percentage of relatively modern designs. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 30  Comparisons of total numbers of ships (or aggregate tonnages) do not take into account the differing global responsibilities and homeporting locations of each fleet. The U.S. Navy has substantial worldwide responsibilities, and a substantial fraction of the U.S. fleet is homeported in the Atlantic. As a consequence, only a certain portion of the U.S. Navy might be available for a crisis or conflict scenario in China’s near-seas region, or could reach that area within a certain amount of time. In contrast, China’s navy has more-limited responsibilities outside China’s near-seas region, and its ships are all homeported along China’s coast at locations that face directly onto China’s near-seas region. In a U.S.-China conflict inside the first island chain, U.S. naval and other forces would be operating at the end of generally long supply lines, while Chinese naval and other forces would be operating at the end of generally short supply lines.  Comparisons of numbers of ships (or aggregate tonnages) do not take into account maritime-relevant military capabilities that countries might have outside their navies, such as land-based anti-ship ballistic missiles (ASBMs), land-based anti-ship cruise missiles (ASCMs), and land-based Air Force aircraft armed with ASCMs or other weapons. Given the significant maritime-relevant non-navy forces present in both the U.S. and Chinese militaries, this is a particularly important consideration in comparing U.S. and Chinese military capabilities for influencing events in the Western Pacific. Although a U.S.-China incident at sea might involve only navy units on both sides, a broader U.S.-China military conflict would more likely be a force-on-force engagement involving multiple branches of each country’s military.  The missions to be performed by one country’s navy can differ greatly from the missions to be performed by another country’s navy. Consequently, navies are better measured against their respective missions than against one another. Although Navy A might have less capability than Navy B, Navy A might nevertheless be better able to perform Navy A’s intended missions than Navy B is to perform Navy B’s intended missions. This is another significant consideration in assessing U.S. and Chinese naval capabilities, because the missions of the two navies are quite different. A 2015 RAND report attempts to take factors like those discussed above more fully into account with the aim of producing a more comprehensive assessment of relative U.S. and Chinese military capabilities for potential conflict scenarios involving Taiwan and the Spratly Islands in the South China Sea. The report states the following: Over the past two decades, China’s People’s Liberation Army (PLA) has transformed itself from a large but antiquated force into a capable, modern military. In most areas, its technology and skill levels lag behind those of the United States, but it has narrowed the gap. Moreover, it enjoys the advantage of proximity in most plausible scenarios and has developed capabilities that capitalize on that advantage.... ... four broad trends emerge: • Since 1996, the PLA has made tremendous strides, and, despite improvements to the U.S. military, the net change in capabilities is moving in favor of China. Some aspects of Chinese military modernization, such as improvements to PLA ballistic missiles, fighter aircraft, and attack submarines, have come extraordinarily quickly by any reasonable historical standard. • The trends vary by mission area, and relative Chinese gains have not been uniform across all areas. In some areas, U.S. improvements have given the United States new options, or China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 31 at least mitigated the speed at which Chinese military modernization has shifted the relative balance. • Distances, even relatively short distances, have a major impact on the two sides’ ability to achieve critical objectives. Chinese power projection capabilities are improving, but present limitations mean that the PLA’s ability to influence events and win battles diminishes rapidly beyond the unrefueled range of jet fighters and diesel submarines. This is likely to change in the years beyond those considered in this report, though operating at greater distances from China will always work, on balance, against China. • The PLA is not close to catching up to the U.S. military in terms of aggregate capabilities, but it does not need to catch up to the United States to dominate its immediate periphery. The advantages conferred by proximity severely complicate U.S. military tasks while providing major advantages to the PLA. This is the central finding of this study and highlights the value of campaign analysis, rather than more abstract assessments of capabilities. Over the next five to 15 years, if U.S. and PLA forces remain on roughly current trajectories, Asia will witness a progressively receding frontier of U.S. dominance. The United States would probably still prevail in a protracted war centered in virtually any area, and Beijing should not infer from the above generalization that it stands to gain from conflict. U.S. and Chinese forces would likely face losses on a scale that neither has suffered in recent decades. But PLA forces will become more capable of establishing temporary local air and naval superiority at the outset of a conflict. In certain regional contingencies, this temporal or local superiority might enable the PLA to achieve limited objectives without “defeating” U.S. forces. Perhaps even more worrisome from a military-political perspective, the ability to contest dominance might lead Chinese leaders to believe that they could deter U.S. intervention in a conflict between it and one or more of its neighbors. This, in turn, would undermine U.S. deterrence and could, in a crisis, tip the balance of debate in Beijing as to the advisability of using force.... Although trends in the military balance are running against the United States, there are many actions that the United States could take to reinforce deterrence and continue to serve as the ultimate force for stability in the Western Pacific.72 As mentioned earlier, while comparisons of the total numbers of ships in the PLAN and the U.S. Navy are highly problematic as a means of assessing relative U.S. and Chinese naval capabilities and how those capabilities compare to the missions assigned to those navies, an examination of the trends over time in the relative numbers of ships can shed some light on how the relative balance of U.S. and Chinese naval capabilities might be changing over time. 72 Eric Heginbotham, The U.S.-China Military Scorecard, Forces, Geography, and the Evolving Balance of Power, 1996-2017, Santa Monica (CA), RAND Corporation, 2015 (RAND report RR-392), pp. xix, xxx-xxxii. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 32 Appendix B. U.S. Navy’s Ability to Counter Chinese ASBMs This appendix provides additional discussion of the issue of the U.S. Navy’s ability to counter China’s ASBMs. Although China’s projected ASBM, as a new type of weapon, might be considered a “game changer,” that does not mean it cannot be countered. There are several potential approaches for countering an ASBM that can be imagined, and these approaches could be used in combination. The ASBM is not the first “game changer” that the Navy has confronted; the Navy in the past has developed counters for other new types of weapons, such as ASCMs, and is likely exploring various approaches for countering ASBMs. Countering China’s projected ASBMs could involve employing a combination of active (i.e., “hard-kill”) measures, such as shooting down ASBMs with interceptor missiles, and passive (i.e., “soft-kill”) measures, such as those for masking the exact location of Navy ships or confusing ASBM reentry vehicles. Employing a combination of active and passive measures would attack various points in the ASBM “kill chain”—the sequence of events that needs to be completed to carry out a successful ASBM attack. This sequence includes detection, identification, and localization of the target ship, transmission of that data to the ASBM launcher, firing the ASBM, and having the ASBM reentry vehicle find the target ship. Attacking various points in an opponent’s kill chain is an established method for countering an opponent’s military capability. A September 30, 2011, press report, for example, quotes Lieutenant General Herbert Carlisle, the Air Force’s deputy chief of staff for operations, plans, and requirements, as stating in regard to Air Force planning that “We’ve taken [China’s] kill chains apart to the ‘nth’ degree.”73 To attack the ASBM kill chain, Navy surface ships, for example, could operate in ways (such as controlling electromagnetic emissions or using deception emitters) that make it more difficult for China to detect, identify, and track those ships.74 The Navy could acquire weapons and systems for disabling or jamming China’s long-range maritime surveillance and targeting systems, for attacking ASBM launchers, for destroying ASBMs in various stages of flight, and for decoying and confusing ASBMs as they approach their intended targets. Options for destroying ASBMs in flight include the SM-3 midcourse BMD interceptor missile (including the new Block IIA 73 David A. Fulghum, “USAF: Slash And Burn Defense Cuts Will Cost Missions, Capabilities,” Aerospace Daily & Defense Report, September 30, 2011: 6. 74 For a journal article discussing actions by the Navy during the period 1956-1972 to conceal the exact locations of Navy ships, see Robert G. Angevine, “Hiding in Plain Sight, The U.S. Navy and Dispersed Operations Under EMCON, 1956-1972,” Naval War College Review, Spring 2011: 79-95. See also Jonathan F. Sullivan, Defending the Fleet From China’s Anti-Ship Ballistic Missile: Naval Deception’s Roles in Sea-Based Missile Defense, A Thesis submitted to the Faculty of the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences of Georgetown University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in Security Studies, April 15, 2011, accessed August 10, 2011, at http://gradworks.umi.com/1491548.pdf; Jon Solomon, “Deception and the Backfire Bomber: Reexamining the Late Cold War Struggle Between Soviet Maritime Reconnaissance and U.S. Navy Countertargeting,” Information Dissemination (www.informationdissemination.net), October 27, 2014; John Solomon, “Deception and the Backfire Bomber, Part II,” Information Dissemination (www.informationdissemination.net), October 28, 2014; John Solomon, “Deception and the Backfire Bomber, Part III,” Information Dissemination (www.informationdissemination.net), October 29, 2014; John Solomon, “Deception and the Backfire Bomber, Part IV,” Information Dissemination (www.informationdissemination.net), October 30, 2014. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 33 version), the SM-6 terminal-defense BMD interceptor missile,75 and accelerating development and deployment of the hypervelocity projectile (HVP), electromagnetic rail gun (EMRG), and solid state lasers (SSLs).76 Options for decoying and confusing ASBMs as they approach their intended targets include equipping ships with systems, such as electronic warfare systems or systems for generating radar-opaque smoke clouds or radar-opaque carbon-fiber clouds, that could confuse an ASBM’s terminal-guidance radar.77 An October 4, 2016, press report states the following: Several times in the past, [Chief of Naval Operations John] Richardson has stressed that long range weapons developments from adversarial nations like Russia and China aren't the end-all, be-all of naval conflicts. Just because China's “carrier-killer” missile has a greater range than the planes aboard a US aircraft carrier doesn't mean the US would shy away from deploying a carrier within that range, Richardson has stated on different occasions. Again, Richardson challenged the notion that a so-called A2/AD zone was “an impenetrable keep out zone that forces can only enter at extreme peril to their existence, let alone their mission.” Richardson took particular issue with the “denial” aspect of A2/AD, repeating his assertion that this denial is an “aspiration” not a “fait accompli.” The maps so common in representing these threats often mark off the limits of different system's ranges with “red arcs that extend off coastlines,” with the implication that military forces crossing these lines face “certain destruction.” But this is all speculation according to Richardson: “The reality is far more complex, it's actually really hard to achieve a hit. It requires the completion of a really complex chain of events.... these arcs represent danger for sure... but the threats they are based on are not insurmountable, and can be managed, will be managed.” “We can fight from within these defended areas, and we will... this is nothing new and has been done before,” said Richardson. So while Russia and China can develop missiles and radars and declare their ranges on paper, things get a lot trickier in the real world, where the US has the most and best experience in operating. “Potential adversaries actually have different geographic features like choke points, islands, ocean currents, mountains,” said Richardson, who urged against oversimplifying complicated, and always unique circumstances in so-called A2/AD zones. “Have no doubt, the US navy is prepared to go wherever it needs to go, at any time, and stay there for as long as necessary in response to our leadership’s call to project our strategic influence,” Richardson concluded. 75 For more on the SM-3, including the Block IIA version, and the SM-6, see CRS Report RL33745, Navy Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 76 For more on HVP, EMRG, and SSLs, see CRS Report R44175, Navy Lasers, Railgun, and Gun-Launched Guided Projectile: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 77 Regarding the option of systems for generating radar-opaque smoke clouds, Thomas J. Culora, “The Strategic Implications of Obscurants,” Naval War College Review, Summer 2010: 73-84; Scott Tait, “Make Smoke!” U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, June 2011: 58-63. Regarding radar-opaque carbon-fiber clouds, see “7th Fleet Tests Innovative Missile Defense System,” Navy News Services, June 26, 2014; Kevin McCaney, “Navy’s Carbon-Fiber Clouds Could Make Incoming Missiles Miss Their Targets,” Defense Systems (http://defensesystems.com), June 27, 2014. See also Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “Cyber, EW Are Secret Missile Defense Weapons Too Secret To Use,” Breaking Defense, December 4, 2015. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service 34 Similarly, an August 29, 2016, press report states the following: The United States Navy is absolutely confident in the ability of its aircraft carriers and carrier air wings to fly and fight within zones defended by so-called anti-access/area denial (A2/AD) weapons.... In the view of the U.S. Navy leadership, A2/AD—as it is now called—has existed since the dawn of warfare when primitive man was fighting with rocks and spears. Overtime, A2/AD techniques have evolved as technology has improved with ever-greater range and lethality. Rocks and spears eventually gave way to bows and arrows, muskets and cannons. Thus, the advent of long-range anti-ship cruise and ballistic missiles is simply another technological evolution of A2/AD. “This is the next play in that,” Adm. John Richardson, chief of naval operations, told The National Interest on Aug. 25 during an interview in his office in the Pentagon. “This A2/AD, well, it’s certainly a goal for some of our competitors, but achieving that goal is much different and much more complicated.” Indeed, as many U.S. Navy commanders including Richardson and Rear Adm. (Upper Half) DeWolfe Miller, the service’s director of air warfare, have pointed out, anti-access bubbles defended by Chinese DF-21D or DF-26 anti-ship ballistic missile systems or Russian Bastion-P supersonic anti-ship missile systems are not impenetrable ‘Iron Domes.’ Nor do formidable Russian and Chinese air defense systems such as the S-400 or HQ-9 necessarily render the airspace they protect into no-go zones for the carrier air wing. Asked directly if he was confident in the ability of the aircraft carrier and its air wing to fight inside an A2/AD zone protected by anti-ship cruise and ballistic missiles as well as advanced air defenses, Richardson was unequivocal in his answer. “Yes,” Richardson said—but he would not say how exactly how due to the need for operational security. “It’s really a suite of capabilities, but I actually think we’re talking too much in the open about some of the things we’re doing, so I want to be thoughtful about how we talk about things so we don’t give any of our competitors an advantage.”... Miller said that there have been threats to the carrier since the dawn of naval aviation. In many ways, the threat to the carrier was arguably much greater during the Cold War when the Soviet Union massed entire regiments of Tupolev Tu-22M3 Backfires and deployed massive cruise missile-armed Oscar-class SSGN submarines to hunt down and destroy the Navy’s flattops. The service developed ways to defeat the Soviet threat—and the carrier will adapt to fight in the current environment. “We could have had this interview twenty-years-ago and there would have been a threat,” Miller said. “The nature of war and A2/AD is not new—that’s my point. I don’t want to downplay it, but our improvements in information warfare, electronic warfare, payloads, the weapons systems that we’ve previously talked about—plus our ability to train to those capabilities that we have—we will create sanctuaries, we’ll fight in those sanctuaries and we’re a maneuver force.”78 An October 18, 2017, blog post states the following: Assuming the DF-21D is ready for battle, can America defend against China’s mighty missile? 78 Dave Majumdar, “Chief of Naval Operations Richardson: US Aircraft Carriers Can Fight Inside A2/AD Zones,” National Interest, August 29, 2016. See also Ryan Pickrell, “Navy Admirals Brush Aside Biggest Worry Of Modern Naval Combat,” Daily Caller, August 31, 2016; Dave Majumdar, “Here Is Why the US Military Is Not In Panic Mode Over China’s Carrier-Killer Missiles,” National Interest, June 20, 2016. China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities Congressional Research Service RL33153 · VERSION 234 · UPDATED 35 While opinions are clearly mixed—in speaking to many sources over the last several years on this topic—it seems clear there is great nervousness in U.S. defense circles. However, as time has passed, initial fears have turned towards a more optimistic assessment.... In the end, the weapon might not be the great “game-changer” that many point it out to be, but a great complicator.79 Author Information Ronald O'Rourke Specialist in Naval Affairs Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 79 Harry J. Kazianis, “Could China's Aircraft Carrier Killer Missiles 'Sink' the U.S. Navy?” National Interest, October 18, 2017. See also Dick Mosier, “Breaking the Anti-Ship Missile Kill Chain,” Center for International Maritime Security, February 26, 2018; Richard A. Bitzinger, “The Myth of the ‘Game-Changer’ Weapon,” Asia Times, April 26, 2018. 		2020-04-24T12:32:36-0400
Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress May 6, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov RL32665 Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Summary In December 2016, the Navy released a force-structure goal that calls for achieving and maintaining a fleet of 355 ships of certain types and numbers. The 355-ship goal was made U.S. policy by Section 1025 of the FY2018 National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 2810/P.L. 115-91 of December 12, 2017). The Trump Administration has identified the achievement of a Navy of 355 or more ships within 10 years as a high priority. The Navy states that it is working as well as it can, within a Navy budget top line that is essentially flat in real (i.e., inflation-adjusted terms), toward achieving that goal while also adequately funding other Navy priorities, such as restoring eroded ship readiness and improving fleet lethality. Navy officials state that while the 355-ship goal is a priority, they want to avoid creating a so-called hollow force, meaning a Navy that has an adequate number of ships but is unable to properly crew, arm, operate, and maintain those ships. The Navy states that its proposed FY2021 budget requests the procurement of eight new ships, but this figure includes LPD-31, an LPD-17 Flight II amphibious ship that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and appropriated procurement funding for) in FY2020. Excluding this ship, the Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget requests the procurement of seven new ships rather than eight. A figure of 7 new ships is less than the 11 that the Navy requested for FY2020 (a figure that excludes CVN-81, an aircraft carrier that Congress authorized in FY2019) or the 13 that Congress procured in FY2020 (a figure that again excludes CVN-81, but includes the above-mentioned LPD-31 as well as an LHA amphibious assault ship that Congress also procured in FY2020). The figure of 7 new ships is also less than the 10 ships that the Navy projected under its FY2020 budget submission that it would request for FY2021, and less than the average ship procurement rate that would be needed over the long run, given current ship service lives, to achieve and maintain a 355-ship fleet. In dollar terms, the Navy is requesting a total of about $19.9 billion for its shipbuilding account for FY2021. This is about $3.9 billion (16.3%) less than the Navy requested for the account for FY2020, about $4.1 billion (17.0%) less than Congress provided for the account for FY2020, and about $3.6 billion (15.3%) less than the $23.5 billion that the Navy projected under its FY2020 budget submission that it would request for the account for FY2021. The Navy states that its FY2021 five-year (FY2021-FY2025) shipbuilding plan includes 44 new ships, but this figure includes the above-mentioned LPD-31 and LHA amphibious ships that Congress procured in FY2020. Excluding these two ships, the Navy’s FY2021 five-year shipbuilding plan includes 42 new ships, which is 13 less than the 55 that were included in the FY2020 (FY2020-FY2024) five-year plan and 12 less than the 54 that were projected for the period FY2021-FY2025 under the Navy’s FY2020 30-year shipbuilding plan. The Navy’s 355-ship force-level goal is the result of a Force Structure Assessment (FSA) conducted by the Navy in 2016. A new FSA, referred to as the Integrated Naval FSA (INFSA), is to be published sometime during the spring of 2020. Statements from Department of the Navy (DON) officials suggest that the INFSA could result in a once-in-a-generation change in the Navy’s fleet architecture, meaning the mix of ships that make up the Navy. DON officials suggest that the INFSA could shift the fleet to a more distributed architecture that includes a reduced proportion of larger ships, an increased proportion of smaller ships, and a newly created category of large unmanned surface vehicles (USVs) and large unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs). Such a change in fleet architecture could alter the mix of ships to be procured for the Navy and the distribution of Navy shipbuilding work among the nation’s shipyards.Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Background ..................................................................................................................................... 2 Navy’s 355-Ship Ship Force-Structure Goal ............................................................................ 2 Introduction ......................................................................................................................... 2 355-Ship Goal Resulted from 2016 Force Structure Assessment (FSA) ............................ 2 355-Ship Goal Made U.S. Policy by FY2018 NDAA ........................................................ 3 355-Ship Goal Is an Administration Priority ...................................................................... 3 Large Unmanned Vehicles and Navy Ship Count ............................................................... 3 Navy’s FY2021, Five-Year, and 30-Year Shipbuilding Plans ................................................... 4 Treatment of Procurement Dates of CVN-81, LPD-31, and LHA-9 .................................. 4 FY2021 Shipbuilding Request ............................................................................................ 4 FY2021 Five-Year (FY2021-FY2025) Shipbuilding Plan .................................................. 5 Projected Force Levels Under FY2020 30-Year Shipbuilding Plan ................................... 7 New FSA To Replace 355-Ship Goal; Could Alter Distribution of Shipbuilding Work ........... 8 New FSA Is Called an Integrated FSA (INFSA) ................................................................ 8 INFSA to Be Released This Year, Perhaps During Spring of 2020 .................................... 8 INFSA Could Call for a Navy of About 390 Manned Ships ............................................... 9 INFSA Could Result in Once-in-a-Generation Change in Fleet Architecture and Distribution of Shipbuilding Work .................................................................................. 9 Potential New Surface Combatant Force Architecture ...................................................... 11 Potential New Amphibious Ship Architecture .................................................................. 13 Potential New Aircraft Carrier/Naval Aviation Force Architecture .................................. 17 Potential New Combat Logistics Force (CLF) Architecture ............................................. 19 Potential New Undersea Force Architecture ..................................................................... 19 Rationale for a More Distributed Fleet Architecture ........................................................ 20 Distributed Maritime Operations (DMO) ......................................................................... 21 Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations (EABO) ......................................................... 22 April 2020 Press Report of DOD Assessment on Revised Navy Force-Level Goal ............... 23 Issues for Congress ........................................................................................................................ 24 COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Impact on Shipbuilding Programs, Shipyards, Supplier Firms, and Employees .......................................................................................................... 24 Potential Impact ................................................................................................................ 24 Past Examples of Assistance to Shipyards and Supplier Firms ........................................ 25 Potential Oversight Questions ........................................................................................... 27 Additional Background Information ................................................................................. 27 COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Impact on U.S. Defense Strategy and Budgets ............................. 27 FY2021 Budget’s Treatment of CVN-81, LPD-31, and LHA-9 Procurement Dates ............. 28 Reprogramming of FY2020 Funding for LHA-9 and EPF Ship ............................................. 28 Delay in Submission of FY2021 30-year Shipbuilding Plan .................................................. 29 Adequacy of Proposed FY2021 Shipbuilding Budget and Five-Year Shipbuilding Plan ...................................................................................................................................... 31 How INFSA Will Change Fleet Architecture, 355-Ship Goal, Mix of Ships to Be Procured, and Distribution of Shipbuilding Work................................................................ 31 Affordability of 30-Year Shipbuilding Plan ............................................................................ 31 Overview ........................................................................................................................... 31 Concern Regarding Potential Impact of Columbia-Class Program .................................. 34 Potential for Cost Growth on Navy Ships ......................................................................... 34 Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service CBO Estimate ................................................................................................................... 35 Sustainment Cost .............................................................................................................. 37 Legislative Activity for FY2021 .................................................................................................... 38 CRS Reports Tracking Legislation on Specific Navy Shipbuilding Programs ....................... 38 Summary of Congressional Action on FY2021 Funding Request .......................................... 39 SHIPS Implementation Act (S. 3258) ..................................................................................... 40 Figures Figure 1. Navy Briefing Slide on Surface Combatant Force Architecture .................................... 12 Figure 2. Navy Estimate of Funding Requirements for FY2020 30-Year Plan ............................. 32 Figure 3. CBO Estimate of Funding Requirements for 30-Year Plan ........................................... 35 Tables Table 1. 355-Ship Force-Level Goal ............................................................................................... 2 Table 2. FY2021 Five-Year (FY2021-FY2025) Shipbuilding Plan................................................. 5 Table 3. FY2020 30-Year (FY2020-FY2049) Shipbuilding Plan .................................................... 6 Table 4. Projected Force Levels Resulting from FY2020 30-Year Shipbuilding Plan .................... 7 Table 5. Navy and CBO Estimates of Cost of 30-Year Shipbuilding Plan .................................... 36 Table 6. Summary of Congressional Action on FY2021 Funding Request ................................... 40 Table B-1. Earlier Navy Force-Structure Goals Dating Back to 2001 .......................................... 48 Table H-1. Total Number of Ships in Navy Since FY1948 ........................................................... 69 Table H-2. Battle Force Ships Procured or Requested, FY1982-FY2024 ..................................... 70 Appendixes Appendix A. Strategic and Budgetary Context ............................................................................. 44 Appendix B. Earlier Navy Force-Structure Goals Dating Back to 2001 ....................................... 48 Appendix C. Comparing Past Ship Force Levels to Current or Potential Future Levels .............. 50 Appendix D. Industrial Base and Employment Aspects of Additional Shipbuilding Work .......... 53 Appendix E. A Summary of Some Acquisition Lessons Learned for Navy Shipbuilding ............ 63 Appendix F. Some Considerations Relating to Warranties in Shipbuilding Contracts .................. 64 Appendix G. Avoiding Procurement Cost Growth vs. Minimizing Procurement Costs ............... 66 Appendix H. Size of the Navy and Navy Shipbuilding Rate ........................................................ 68 Appendix I. Procurement Dates of CVN-81, LPD-31, and LHA-9 .............................................. 71 Appendix J. Letters from Members of Congress Regarding COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Impact on Defense Industry and Workforce ............................................................................... 75 Appendix K. DOD and Navy Memoranda and Press Reports Regarding COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Impact on Shipbuilding Programs....................................................................... 78 Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Contacts Author Information ...................................................................................................................... 102 Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction This report presents background information and issues for Congress concerning the Navy’s force structure and shipbuilding plans. The current and planned size and composition of the Navy, the annual rate of Navy ship procurement, the capacity of the naval shipbuilding industry, and the prospective affordability of the Navy’s shipbuilding plans have been oversight matters for the congressional defense committees for many years. The Navy states that its proposed FY2021 budget requests the procurement of eight new ships, but this figure includes LPD-31, an LPD-17 Flight II amphibious ship that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and appropriated procurement funding for) in FY2020. Excluding this ship, the Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget requests the procurement of seven new ships rather than eight, including one Columbia-class ballistic missile submarine (SSBN), one Virginia-class attack submarine (SSN), two DDG-51 destroyers, one FFG(X) frigate, and two TATS towing, salvage, and recue ships. The issue for Congress is whether to approve, reject, or modify the Navy’s proposed FY2021 shipbuilding program and the Navy’s longer-term shipbuilding plans. Decisions that Congress makes on this issue can substantially affect Navy capabilities and funding requirements, and the U.S. shipbuilding industrial base. Detailed coverage of certain individual Navy shipbuilding programs can be found in the following CRS reports:  CRS Report R41129, Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.  CRS Report RL32418, Navy Virginia (SSN-774) Class Attack Submarine Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.  CRS Report RS20643, Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. (This report also covers the issue of the Administration’s FY2020 budget proposal, which the Administration withdrew on April 30, to not fund a mid-life refueling overhaul [called a refueling complex overhaul, or RCOH] for the aircraft carrier Harry S. Truman [CVN-75], and to retire CVN-75 around FY2024.)  CRS Report RL32109, Navy DDG-51 and DDG-1000 Destroyer Programs: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.  CRS Report R44972, Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.  CRS Report R43543, Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.  CRS Report R43546, Navy John Lewis (TAO-205) Class Oiler Shipbuilding Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.  CRS Report R45757, Navy Large Unmanned Surface and Undersea Vehicles: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. For a discussion of the strategic and budgetary context in which U.S. Navy force structure and shipbuilding plans may be considered, see Appendix A. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 2 Background Navy’s 355-Ship Ship Force-Structure Goal Introduction On December 15, 2016, the Navy released a force-structure goal that calls for achieving and maintaining a fleet of 355 ships of certain types and numbers.1 The force level of 355 ships is a goal to be attained in the future; the actual size of the Navy in recent years has generally been between 270 and 300 ships. Table 1 shows the composition of the 355-ship force-level objective. Table 1. 355-Ship Force-Level Goal Ship Category Number of ships Ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs) 12 Attack submarines (SSNs) 66 Aircraft carriers (CVNs) 12 Large surface combatants (i.e., cruisers [CGs] and destroyers [DDGs]) 104 Small surface combatants (i.e., frigates [FFGs], Littoral Combat Ships, and mine warfare ships) 52 Amphibious ships 38 Combat Logistics Force (CLF) ships (i.e., at-sea resupply ships) 32 Command and support ships 39 TOTAL 355 Source: U.S. Navy, Report to Congress on the Annual Long-Range Plan for Construction of Naval Vessels for Fiscal Year 2020, Table A-1 on page 10. 355-Ship Goal Resulted from 2016 Force Structure Assessment (FSA) The 355-ship force-level goal is the result of a Force Structure Assessment (FSA) conducted by the Navy in 2016. An FSA is an analysis in which the Navy solicits inputs from U.S. regional combatant commanders (CCDRs) regarding the types and amounts of Navy capabilities that CCDRs deem necessary for implementing the Navy’s portion of the national military strategy and then translates those CCDR inputs into required numbers of ships, using current and projected Navy ship types. The analysis takes into account Navy capabilities for both warfighting and day-to-day forward-deployed presence.2 Although the result of the FSA is often reduced for convenience to single number (e.g., 355 ships), FSAs take into account a number of factors, including types and capabilities of Navy ships, aircraft, unmanned vehicles, and weapons, as well as ship homeporting arrangements and operational cycles. Thus, although the number of ships called for by an FSA might appear to be a one-dimensional figure, it actually incorporates multiple aspects of Navy capability and capacity. The Navy conducts a new FSA or an update to the existing FSA every few years, as circumstances require, to determine its force-structure goal. 1 For previous Navy force-level goals, see Appendix B. 2 For further discussion, see U.S. Navy, Executive Summary, 2016 Navy Force Structure Assessment (FSA), December 15, 2016, pp. 1-2. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 3 355-Ship Goal Made U.S. Policy by FY2018 NDAA Section 1025 of the FY2018 National Defense Authorization Act, or NDAA (H.R. 2810/P.L. 115-91 of December 12, 2017), states the following: SEC. 1025. Policy of the United States on minimum number of battle force ships. (a) Policy.—It shall be the policy of the United States to have available, as soon as practicable, not fewer than 355 battle force ships, comprised of the optimal mix of platforms, with funding subject to the availability of appropriations or other funds. (b) Battle force ships defined.—In this section, the term “battle force ship” has the meaning given the term in Secretary of the Navy Instruction 5030.8C. The term battle force ships in the above provision refers to the ships that count toward the quoted size of the Navy in public policy discussions about the Navy.3 355-Ship Goal Is an Administration Priority The Trump Administration has identified the achievement of a Navy of 355 or more ships within 10 years as a high priority. The Navy states that it is working as well as it can, within a Navy budget top line that is essentially flat in real (i.e., inflation-adjusted terms), toward achieving that goal while also adequately funding other Navy priorities, such as restoring eroded ship readiness and improving fleet lethality. Navy officials state that while the 355-ship goal is a priority, they want to avoid creating a so-called hollow force, meaning a Navy that has an adequate number of ships but is unable to properly crew, arm, operate, and maintain those ships. Large Unmanned Vehicles and Navy Ship Count Because large unmanned surface and underwater vehicles now being developed by the Navy could be deployed directly from pier (rather than from a manned Navy ship) to perform missions that might otherwise be assigned to manned ships and submarines, some observers raised a question as to whether the large UVs unmanned surface and underwater vehicles should be included in the top-level count of the number of ships in the Navy. In December 2019, it was reported that the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) had directed the Navy to include in its FY2021 budget submission a legislative proposal to formally change the definition of which ships count toward the quoted size of the Navy (known as the number of battle force ships) to include not only manned ships, but also large UVs that operate essentially as unmanned ships.4 In January 2020, however, Admiral Michael Gilday, the Chief of Naval Operations, stated that the top-level expression of the ship force-level goal resulting from the Navy’s next FSA (discussed later in this report), will not include UVs.5 3 The battle force ships method for counting the number of ships in the Navy was established in 1981 by agreement between the Secretary of the Navy and the Secretary of Defense, and has been modified somewhat over time, in part by Section 1021 of the Carl Levin and Howard P. “Buck” McKeon National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2015 (H.R. 3979/P.L. 113-291 of December 19, 2014). 4 See Justin Katz, “OMB: Pentagon Must Submit Proposal to ‘Redefine’ Battleforce Ships to Include Unmanned Vehicles,” Inside Defense, December 20, 2019; Joseph Trevithick, “White House Asks Navy To Include New Unmanned Vessels In Its Ambitious 355 Ship Fleet Plan,” The Drive, December 20, 2019; Paul McCleary, “Navy To Slash 24 Ships in 2021 Plan, Bolster Unmanned Effort,” Breaking Defense, December 20, 2019, David B. Larter, “Pentagon Proposes Big Cuts to US Navy Destroyer Construction, Retiring 13 Cruisers,” Defense News, December 24, 2019. 5 See, for example, Sam LaGrone, “CNO Gilday Calls for Budget Increase to Reach 355 Ship Fleet; New Battle Force Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 4 Navy’s FY2021, Five-Year, and 30-Year Shipbuilding Plans Treatment of Procurement Dates of CVN-81, LPD-31, and LHA-9 The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission presents the aircraft carrier CVN-81 as a ship that Congress procured in FY2020. Consistent with congressional action on the Navy’s FY2019 budget regarding the procurement of CVN-81, this CRS report treats CVN-81 as a ship that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and provided procurement funding for) in FY2019. Discussion in this CRS report of the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission is adjusted to show CVN-81 as a ship that was procured in FY2019. The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission presents LPD-31, an LPD-17 Flight II amphibious ship, as a ship requested for procurement in FY2021, and the amphibious assault ship LHA-9 as a ship projected for procurement in FY2023. Consistent with congressional action on the Navy’s FY2020 budget regarding the procurement of LPD-31 and LHA-9, this CRS report treats LPD-31 and LHA-9 as ships that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and provided procurement funding for) in FY2020. Discussion in this CRS report of the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission is adjusted to show LPD-31 and LHA-9 as ships that were procured in FY2020. For additional discussion regarding the treatment in this report of the procurement dates of CVN-81, LPD-31, and LHA-9, see Appendix I. FY2021 Shipbuilding Request The Navy states that its proposed FY2021 budget requests the procurement of eight new ships, but this figure includes LPD-31, an LPD-17 Flight II amphibious ship that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and appropriated procurement funding for) in FY2020 (see previous section.) Excluding this ship, the Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget requests the procurement of seven new ships rather than eight, including  one Columbia-class ballistic missile submarine (SSBN),  one Virginia-class attack submarine (SSN),  two DDG-51 destroyers,  one FFG(X) frigate, and  two TATS towing, salvage, and recue ships. A figure of seven new ships is less than:  the 11 ships that the Navy requested for FY2020 (a figure that excludes CVN-81, an aircraft carrier that Congress authorized in FY2019);  the 13 ships that Congress procured in FY2020 (a figure that again excludes CVN-81, but includes the above-mentioned LPD-17 Flight II amphibious ship as well as an LHA amphibious assault ship that Congress also procured in FY2020);  the 10 ships that the Navy projected under its FY2020 budget submission that it would request for FY2021; and Count Won’t Include Unmanned Ships,” USNI News, January 14, 2020; Rich Abott, “CNO: Ship Count Will Not Include Unmanned; Bigger Topline Needed For Fleet Goal,” Defense Daily, January 15, 2020; John M. Doyle, “CNO Wants Larger Slice of Defense Budget to Modernize, Meet China Threat,” Seapower, January 15, 2020; Rich Abott, “CNO: Ship Count Will Not Include Unmanned; Bigger Topline Needed For Fleet Goal,” Defense Daily, January 15, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 5  the average ship procurement rate that would be needed over the long run, given current ship service lives, to achieve and maintain a 355-ship fleet. In dollar terms, the Navy is requesting a total of about $19.9 billion for its shipbuilding account for FY2021. This is about  $3.9 billion (16.3%) less than the Navy requested for the account for FY2020;  $4.1 billion (17.0%) less than Congress provided for the account for FY2020; and  $3.6 billion (15.3%) less than the $23.5 billion that the Navy projected under its FY2020 budget submission that it would request for the account for FY2021. FY2021 Five-Year (FY2021-FY2025) Shipbuilding Plan The Navy states that its FY2021 five-year (FY2021-FY2025) shipbuilding plan (Table 2) includes 44 new ships, but this figure includes the above-mentioned LPD-31 and LHA amphibious ships that Congress procured in FY2020. Excluding these two ships, the Navy’s FY2021 five-year shipbuilding plan includes 42 new ships, which is  13 ships less than the 55 that were included in the FY2020 (FY2020-FY2024) five-year plan, and  12 ships less than the 54 that were projected for the period FY2021-FY2025 under the Navy’s FY2020 30-year shipbuilding plan. Table 2 also shows, for reference purposes, the ships funded for procurement in FY2020. Table 2. FY2021 Five-Year (FY2021-FY2025) Shipbuilding Plan FY2019 shown for reference FY20 (enacted) FY21 (req.) FY22 FY23 FY24 FY25 FY21-FY25 Total Columbia (SSBN-826) class ballistic missile submarine Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78) class aircraft carrier [a] 1 1 2 Virginia (SSN-774) class attack submarine 2 1 2 2 2 2 9 Arleigh Burke (DDG-51) class destroyer 3 2 2 1 2 1 8 FFG(X) frigate 1 1 1 2 2 3 9 LHA amphibious assault ship 1 [b] [b] LPD-17 Fight II amphibious ship 1 [b] [b] 1 1 2 Expeditionary Fast Transport (EPF) ship 1 Submarine tender (AS[X]) 1 1 John Lewis (TAO-205) class oiler 2 1 2 1 4 TATS towing, salvage, and rescue ship 2 2 1 3 TAGOS(X) ocean surveillance ship 1 1 1 1 4 TOTAL 13 7 7 8 11 9 42 Source: Table prepared by CRS based on FY2021 Navy budget submission, with adjustments as noted below Notes: [a] The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission presents the aircraft carrier CVN-81 as a ship that Congress procured in FY2020. Consistent with congressional action on the Navy’s FY2019 budget regarding the procurement of CVN-81, this CRS report treats CVN-81 as a ship that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and provided procurement funding for) in FY2019. For additional discussion, see Appendix I. [b] The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission presents LPD-31, an LPD-17 Flight II amphibious ship, as a ship requested for Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 6 procurement in FY2021, and the amphibious assault ship LHA-9 as a ship projected for procurement in FY2023. Consistent with congressional action on the Navy’s FY2020 budget regarding the procurement of LPD-31 and LHA-9, this CRS report treats LPD-31 and LHA-9 as ships that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and provided procurement funding for) in FY2020. For additional discussion, see Appendix I. The Navy has not yet submitted its FY2021 30-year (FY2021-FY2050) shipbuilding plan. As a placeholder pending the submission of that plan, Table 3 shows the Navy’s FY2020 30-year (FY2020-FY2049) 30-year shipbuilding plan. As shown in Table 3, the Navy’s FY2020 30-year shipbuilding plan included 304 new ships, or an average of about 10 per year. In devising a 30-year shipbuilding plan to move the Navy toward its ship force-structure goal, key assumptions and planning factors include but are not limited to ship construction times and service lives, estimated ship procurement costs, projected shipbuilding funding levels, and industrial-base considerations. Table 3. FY2020 30-Year (FY2020-FY2049) Shipbuilding Plan FY CVNs LSCs SSCs SSNs LPSs SSBNs AWSs CLFs Supt Total 20 1 3 1 3 2 2 12 21 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 10 22 2 2 2 1 2 9 23 3 2 2 1 2 3 13 24 3 2 2 1 1 1 1 11 25 3 2 2 1 1 2 11 26 2 2 2 1 1 1 2 11 27 3 2 2 1 2 1 1 12 28 1 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 11 29 3 2 2 1 1 1 1 11 30 2 1 2 1 1 1 2 10 31 3 2 2 1 2 1 2 13 32 1 2 2 2 1 1 1 2 12 33 3 2 2 1 1 1 2 12 34 2 2 2 1 2 2 11 35 3 2 2 1 1 9 36 1 2 2 2 1 8 37 3 2 2 7 38 2 2 2 1 7 39 3 2 2 1 8 40 1 2 2 2 1 8 41 3 2 2 1 8 42 2 2 2 1 1 8 43 3 2 2 1 8 44 1 2 2 2 1 8 45 3 2 2 1 2 2 12 46 2 2 2 1 2 9 47 3 2 2 1 2 10 48 1 2 2 2 1 2 2 12 49 3 2 2 1 2 3 13 Total 7 76 58 61 5 12 28 27 30 304 Source: U.S. Navy, Report to Congress on the Annual Long-Range Plan for Construction of Naval Vessels for Fiscal Year 2020, Table A2-1 on page 13. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 7 Key: FY = Fiscal Year; CVNs = aircraft carriers; LSCs = surface combatants (i.e., cruisers and destroyers); SSCs = small surface combatants (i.e., Littoral Combat Ships [LCSs] and frigates [FFG(X)s]); SSNs = attack submarines; LPSs = large payload submarines; SSBNs = ballistic missile submarines; AWSs = amphibious warfare ships; CLFs = combat logistics force (i.e., resupply) ships; Supt = support ships. Projected Force Levels Under FY2020 30-Year Shipbuilding Plan The Navy has not yet submitted its FY2021 30-year (FY2021-FY2050) shipbuilding plan. As a placeholder pending the submission of that plan, Table 4 shows the Navy’s projection of ship force levels for FY2020-FY2049 that would result from implementing the FY2020 30-year (FY2020-FY2049) 30-year shipbuilding plan shown in Table 3. Table 4. Projected Force Levels Resulting from FY2020 30-Year Shipbuilding Plan CVNs LSCs SSCs SSNs SSGN/LPSs SSBNs AWSs CLFs Supt Total 355-ship goal 12 104 52 66 0 12 38 32 39 355 FY20 11 94 30 52 4 14 33 29 34 301 FY21 11 92 33 53 4 14 34 30 34 305 FY22 11 93 33 52 4 14 34 31 39 311 FY23 11 95 32 51 4 14 35 31 41 314 FY24 11 94 35 47 4 14 36 32 41 314 FY25 10 95 35 44 4 14 37 32 42 313 FY26 10 96 36 44 2 14 38 31 43 314 FY27 9 100 38 42 1 13 37 32 44 316 FY28 10 102 41 42 13 38 32 44 322 FY29 10 104 43 44 12 36 32 44 325 FY30 10 107 45 46 11 36 32 44 331 FY31 10 110 47 48 11 36 32 43 337 FY32 10 112 49 49 11 36 32 44 343 FY33 10 115 50 51 11 38 32 44 351 FY34 10 117 52 53 11 36 32 44 355 FY35 10 114 55 54 11 34 32 45 355 FY36 10 109 57 56 11 35 32 45 355 FY37 10 107 58 58 10 35 32 45 355 FY38 10 108 59 57 10 35 32 44 355 FY39 10 105 61 58 10 37 32 42 355 FY40 9 105 62 59 10 37 32 41 355 FY41 10 104 61 59 11 37 32 41 355 FY42 9 106 60 61 12 36 32 39 355 FY43 9 108 57 61 1 12 36 32 39 355 FY44 9 109 55 62 1 12 36 32 39 355 FY45 10 107 55 63 1 12 36 32 39 355 FY46 9 106 54 64 2 12 37 32 39 355 FY47 9 107 54 65 2 12 35 32 39 355 FY48 9 109 51 66 2 12 35 32 39 355 FY49 10 108 50 67 3 12 35 31 39 355 Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 8 Source: U.S. Navy, Report to Congress on the Annual Long-Range Plan for Construction of Naval Vessels for Fiscal Year 2020, Table A2-4 on page 13. Note: Figures for support ships include five JHSVs transferred from the Army to the Navy and operated by the Navy primarily for the performance of Army missions. Key: FY = Fiscal Year; CVNs = aircraft carriers; LSCs = surface combatants (i.e., cruisers and destroyers); SSCs = small surface combatants (i.e., frigates, Littoral Combat Ships [LCSs], and mine warfare ships); SSNs = attack submarines; SSGNs/LPSs = cruise missile submarines/large payload submarines; SSBNs = ballistic missile submarines; AWSs = amphibious warfare ships; CLFs = combat logistics force (i.e., resupply) ships; Supt = support ships. New FSA To Replace 355-Ship Goal; Could Alter Distribution of Shipbuilding Work New FSA Is Called an Integrated FSA (INFSA) A new FSA—referred to as the Integrated Naval FSA (INFSA), with the term naval referring to both the Navy and Marine Corps (i.e., the two naval services)—is now underway as the successor to the 2016 FSA.6 Department of the Navy (DON) officials have stated that they are referring to the new FSA as an integrated naval FSA to emphasize that it will integrate Marine Corps requirements into the FSA process more fully than previous FSAs. DON officials state that the INFSA will take into account the Trump Administration’s December 2017 National Security Strategy document and its January 2018 National Defense Strategy document, both of which put an emphasis on renewed great power competition with China and Russia,7 as well as updated information on Chinese and Russian naval and other military capabilities and recent developments in new technologies, including those related to unmanned vehicles (UVs).8 INFSA to Be Released This Year, Perhaps During Spring of 2020 Through much of 2019, Navy officials stated that the INFSA was to be completed by the end of 2019. A September 27, 2019, press report stated that an interim version was to be completed by September 2019, in time to inform programmatic decisions on the FY2022 Program Objective Memorandum (POM), meaning the in-house DOD planning document that will guide the development of DOD’s FY2022 budget submission.9 A December 6, 2019, memorandum from 6 A September 27, 2019, press report stated that on September 6, 2019, the Chief of Naval Operations and the Commandant of the Marine Corps signed a memorandum stating that the two services will develop a “comprehensive naval force architecture” to inform the new FSA, and that the new FSA will be developed as an integrated naval (i.e., Navy-Marine Corps) FSA (INFSA). (Mallory Shelbourne, “Navy, Marine Corps Conducting Integrated Force-Structure Assessment,” Inside Defense, September 27, 2019. See also Otto Kreisher, “New Force Structure Assessment Will Address Needs of ‘Great Power Competition,’ Two Top Requirements Officers Say,” Seapower, October 22, 2019, and the section under the subheader “Naval Integrated Force Structure Assessment” in Megan Eckstein, “Navy Marines Wargaming New Gear to Support Emerging Warfare Concepts,” USNI News, October 23, 2019.) 7 For additional discussion of the defense implications of great power competition, see CRS Report R43838, Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 8 See, for example, Marcus Weisgerber, “US Navy Re-Evaluating 355-Ship Goal,” Defense One, February 1, 2019; Paul McLeary, “Navy Rethinks 355-Ship Fleet: CNO Richardson,” Breaking Defense, February 1, 2019; Mallory Shelbourne, “CNO: Navy Expects New Force-Structure Assessment ‘Later This Year,’” Inside the Navy, February 4, 2019. 9 Mallory Shelbourne, “Navy, Marine Corps Conducting Integrated Force-Structure Assessment,” Inside Defense, September 27, 2019. See also Otto Kreisher, “New Force Structure Assessment Will Address Needs of ‘Great Power Competition,’ Two Top Requirements Officers Say,” Seapower, October 22, 2019, and the section under the subheader “Naval Integrated Force Structure Assessment” in Megan Eckstein, “Navy Marines Wargaming New Gear to Support Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 9 Acting Secretary of the Navy Thomas Modly stated that he expected the final INFSA to be published no later than January 15, 2020.10 A January 23, 2020, press report quoted Modly as saying that the January 15 date was an internal Navy deadline, and that the Navy expects that the INFSA will be released to outside audiences sometime during the spring of 2020,11 which would be well after the submission of the Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget on February 10, 2020, and perhaps after the defense committees have completed most or all of their FY2021 budget-review hearings moved into markup on the FY2021 National Defense Authorization Act. In his December 6, 2019, memorandum, Acting Secretary Modly stated that “my staff and I will become involved” in the INFSA, and that one of his five immediate objectives as acting secretary is to “establish an Integrated Plan to achieve a [fleet of] 355 (or more) ships, Unmanned Underwater Vehicles (UUVs), and Unmanned Surface Vehicles (USVs) for greater global naval power, within 10 years.” INFSA Could Call for a Navy of About 390 Manned Ships Statements from Navy officials in the early months of 2020 suggest that the INFSA could result in a new Navy force-level goal for a fleet of about 390 manned ships plus about 45 unmanned or optionally manned ships, for a total of about 435 manned and unmanned or optionally manned ships. Navy officials have provided few additional details about the composition of this 390/435-ship force-level goal.12 Navy officials have stated that the INFSA is being closely reviewed by the Secretary of Defense Mark Esper; it is possible that this review could lead to a change in the figures of 390 manned ships and 45 unmanned or optionally manned ships.13 INFSA Could Result in Once-in-a-Generation Change in Fleet Architecture and Distribution of Shipbuilding Work Statements from DON officials suggest that the INFSA could result in a once-in-a-generation change in the Navy’s fleet architecture, meaning the mix of ships that make up the Navy and how those ships are combined into formations and used to perform various missions. As detailed in the following sections of this report, statements from DON officials suggest that the INFSA could shift the fleet to a more distributed architecture that includes a reduced proportion of larger ships, an increased proportion of smaller ships, and a newly created category of large unmanned surface vehicles (USVs) and large unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs). Such a change in fleet architecture could alter, perhaps substantially, the mix of ships to be procured for the Navy and Emerging Warfare Concepts,” USNI News, October 23, 2019. 10 Memorandum for distribution from Acting Secretary of the Navy Thomas B. Modly, subject “SecNav Vector !,” dated December 6, 2019. See also David B. Larter, “Acting US Navy Secretary: Deliver Me a 355-Ship Fleet by 2030,” Defense News, December 9, 2019. 11 Mallory Shelbourne, “Modly: Navy Expects to Release FSA by Spring,” Inside Defense, January 23, 2020. 12 See, for example, Ben Werner, SECNAV Modly Says Nation Needs Larger, Distributed Fleet of 390 Hulls,” USNI News, February 28, 2020; Mallory Shelbourne, “Modly Sketches Out Potential Navy Force Structure Changes, Anticipates 390-Ship Fleet,” Inside Defense, February 28, 2020; Rich Abott, “Modly Reveals Next Force Structure Assessment Details, Working Toward 390-Ship Fleet,” Defense Daily, February 28, 2020; Patrick Tucker, “Acting Navy Secretary: We Need More than 355 Ships, and That’s Not Even Counting Robot Vessels,” Defense One, February 28, 2020; Connor O’Brien, “Acting Navy Secretary Hints At Larger Fleet Goal,” Politico Pro, February 28, 2020. 13 See, for example, Paul McLeary, “Esper To Navy: Rethink Your Shipbuilding Plan,” Breaking Defense, February 25, 2020; Paul McLeary, “EXCLUSIVE: SecDef Esper Seeks Détente With HASC; New Navy Plan This Summer,” Breaking Defense, February 28, 2020; Paul Mcleary, “SecNav Details Gaps Between Navy & Pentagon Shipbuilding Plans,” Breaking Defense, March 11, 2020; Megan Eckstein, “Modly: Parallel Fleet Studies Could Reshape Future of Aircraft Carriers,” USNI News, March 12, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 10 the distribution of Navy shipbuilding work among the nation’s shipyards. A February 3, 2020, press report, for example, stated The Navy’s plans to get to 355 manned ships by 2030 will rely on new classes of ships that don’t exist yet—including new kinds of amphibious and supply ships as well as “lightly manned” ships—the acting Navy secretary told USNI News. The Force Structure Assessment that will lay out the Navy’s path to this larger fleet, which leadership has described as “355-plus, plus unmanned,” has been delayed and won’t come out until after the Fiscal Year 2021 budget request is released next week. FY 2021 will put the Navy on a path to crest over 300 ships, Acting Secretary of the Navy Thomas Modly told USNI News in a phone interview, but the real growth will come in the FY 2022 request. Still, Modly previewed what the FSA might hold. “We haven’t done a really comprehensive force structure assessment in a couple of years; 2016 was the last one. So we started on a new path for that last fall, and what we’re finding in that force structure assessment is that the number of ships we need are going to be more than 355. And when you add in some of the unmanned vessels and things like that that we’re going through experimental phases on, it’s probably going to be significantly more than [355],” he said. “There are certain ship classes that don’t even exist right now that we’re looking at that will be added into that mix, but the broad message is, it’s going to be a bigger fleet, it’s going to be a more distributed fleet, it’s going to be a more agile fleet. And we need to figure out what that path is and also understand our topline limitations, because no one wants a 355-plus fleet that’s hollow, that we can’t maintain. So we’re looking at balancing all those things.” Asked what new ship classes the service is considering, Modly mentioned new amphibious ships, as well as new kinds of supply ships and “lightly manned” ships that are “more like missile magazines that would accompany surface action groups.” Talk of a new class of amphibious warships began last summer, when Commandant of the Marine Corps Gen. David Berger called for alternative kinds of amphibious lift for Marines in his Commandant’s Planning Guidance. Since that time, Marine Corps and Navy officials at various conferences have suggested that the services are narrowing in on the Offshore Support Vessel [OSV] as a model for what they want. Having several OSVs instead of one dock landing ship (LSD), for example, might be able to carry the same number of Marines but distribute them across the littorals instead of concentrating them on one hull—which defensively makes them harder to target and offensively allows them to be more agile under the Distributed Maritime Operations and Expeditionary Advance Base Operations concepts. On the other hand, public talk of a “lightly manned” ship type is new. The Navy had previously envisioned its Large Unmanned Surface Vehicle [LUSV] to serve as a magazine ship for manned combatants, but Congress used its annual defense bill to block the Navy from building an unmanned ship with vertical launch tubes. Making these ships “lightly manned” could keep the magazine ship concept alive while alleviating congressional concerns, and could create the added benefit of allowing the small crews to use their hulls to train with other nations’ navies during peacetime…. Modly, when asked why the Navy was betting so much of its ability to get to 355 ships by the end of the decade on quickly acquiring brand new ship classes that haven’t gone through the Navy and industry design and construction process yet, said, “I think ‘quickly’ is going to have to define everything we do, because the world is changing pretty quickly and we’re going to have to react more quickly.” Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 11 “You look at the frigate [FFG(X)] program: we think, because of the way we’ve approached that program, we’ve probably taken three years off the product development lifecycle for that. So we have to start doing the same type of thing: looking at proven hulls, things that can be adaptable for different areas. I understand the Hill’s concerns about unmanned, and we get that. … We have to convince them with data: we have to wargame this, we have to iterate it over and over again.” The acting secretary added that President Donald Trump ran in 2016 on a larger fleet, and Congress passed the 355 figure into law in 2017. Though the Navy only has assumptions from wargames and simulations today regarding these new classes of ships, he said the service needed to settle on a “north star” and begin the research and development and construction to get hulls in the water, and then it could refine its vision as needed once fleet leaders understand how the new and old ships work together to bring naval power to a distributed fight.… Modly said the FY 2021 budget—expected to be released next week—will allow the Navy to grow some, ahead of what he expects will be a much stronger 2022 budget. “I think what you’ll see is mostly an emphasis on readiness—we don’t want to have a hollow force, and so we had to make some trades in the end game, but we’re still on a path to grow the Navy,” he said. “This year, this budget will keep us on a path to grow to over 300, but the ultimate goal was to grow to an even bigger fleet than that,” and the Navy is already looking at its 2022 planning and eyeing multiple paths to grow faster.14 The following sections provide details on how the Navy’s new fleet architecture could alter the mix of ships within various parts of the Navy. Potential New Surface Combatant Force Architecture Statements from Navy officials suggest that the new FSA might shift the Navy’s surface combatant force to a more distributed architecture that includes a reduced proportion of large surface combatants (i.e., cruisers and destroyers), an increased proportion of small surface combatants (i.e., frigates and LCSs), and a newly created third tier of unmanned surface vehicles (USVs). In presenting its proposed FY2020 and FY20201 budgets, the Navy has highlighted its plans for developing and procuring USVs in coming years. Figure 1 provides, for the surface combatant portion of the Navy,15 a conceptual comparison of the current fleet architecture (shown on the left as the “ship centric force”) and the new, more distributed architecture (shown on the right as the “distributed/nodal force”). The figure does not depict the entire surface combatant fleet, but rather a representative portion of it. In the figure, each sphere represents a manned ship or USV. As shown in the color coding, under both the current fleet architecture and the more distributed architecture, the manned ships (i.e., the LSCs and SSCs) are equipped with a combination of sensors (green), command and control (C2) equipment (red), and payloads other than sensors and C2 equipment, meaning principally weapons (blue). 14 Megan Eckstein, “SECNAV Modly: Path to 355 Ships Will Rely on New Classes of Warships,” USNI News, February 3, 2020. See also Rich Abott, “Modly Explains Why 355 Ship FSA In A Decade, Presenting To Esper In Days,” Defense Daily, January 29, 2020; Rich Abott, “Modly: Future Navy Focusing On Next 10 Years,” Defense Daily, January 24, 2020. 15 Other major parts of the Navy include submarines, aircraft carriers, amphibious ships, logistics (resupply) ships, and support ships. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 12 Under the more distributed architecture, the manned ships would be on average smaller (because a greater share of them would be SSCs), and this would be possible because some of the surface combatant force’s weapons and sensors would be shifted from the manned ships to USVs, with weapon-equipped Large USVs (LUSVs) acting primarily as adjunct weapon magazines and sensor-equipped Medium USVs (MUSVs) contributing to the fleet’s sensor network. As shown in Figure 1, under the Navy’s current surface combatant force architecture, there are to be 20 LSCs for every 10 SSCs (i.e., a 2:1 ratio of LSCs to SSCs), with no significant contribution from LUSVs and MUSVs. This is consistent with the Navy’s current force-level objective, which calls for achieving a 355-ship fleet that includes 104 LSCs and 52 SSCs (a 2:1 ratio). Under the more distributed architecture, the ratio of LSCs to SSCs would be reversed, with 10 LSCs for every 20 SSCs (a 1:2 ratio), and there would also now be 30 LUSVs and 40 MUSVs. Figure 1. Navy Briefing Slide on Surface Combatant Force Architecture Each sphere represents a ship or unmanned surface vehicle (USV) Source: Illustration accompanying Megan Eckstein, “Sea Hunter Unmanned Ship Continues Autonomy Testing as NAVSEA Moves Forward with Draft RFP,” USNI News, April 29, 2019. The illustration was also included as Slide 2 in a Navy briefing entitled “Designing & Building the Surface Fleet: Unmanned and Small Combatants,” by Rear Admiral Casey Moton at a June 20, 2019, conference of the American Society of Naval Engineers (ASNE). Notes: Each sphere represents a ship or a USV. LSC means large surface combatant (i.e., cruiser or destroyer), and SSC means small surface combatant (i.e., frigate or Littoral Combat Ship). As shown in the color coding, the LSCs and SSCs are equipped with a combination of sensors (green), command and control (C2) equipment (red), and payloads other than sensors and C2 equipment, meaning principally weapons (blue). LUSVs and MUSVs, in contrast, are equipped primarily with weapons (blue) or sensors (green). A January 15, 2019, press report states Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 13 The Navy plans to spend this year taking the first few steps into a markedly different future, which, if it comes to pass, will upend how the fleet has fought since the Cold War. And it all starts with something that might seem counterintuitive: It’s looking to get smaller. “Today, I have a requirement for 104 large surface combatants in the force structure assessment; [and] I have [a requirement for] 52 small surface combatants,” said Surface Warfare Director Rear Adm. Ronald Boxall. “That’s a little upside down. Should I push out here and have more small platforms? I think the future fleet architecture study has intimated ‘yes,’ and our war gaming shows there is value in that.”16 Another way of summarizing Figure 1 would be to say that the surface combatant force architecture (reading vertically down the figure) would change from 20+10+0+0 (i.e., a total of 30 surface combatant platforms, all manned, and a platform ratio of 2-1-0-0) for a given portion of the surface combatant force, to 10+20+30+40 (i.e., a total of 100 surface combatant platforms, 70 of which would be LUSVs and MUSVs, and a platform ratio of 1-2-3-4) for a given portion of the surface combatant force. The Navy refers to the more distributed architecture’s combination of LSCs, SSCs, LUSVs, and MUSVs as the Future Surface Combatant Force (FSCF). Figure 1 is conceptual, so the platform ratios for the more distributed architecture should be understood as notional or approximate rather than exact. The point of the figure is not that relative platform numbers under the more distributed architecture would change to the exact ratios shown in the figure, but that they would evolve over time toward something broadly resembling those ratios.17 A January 23, 2020, press report states that The Navy is expected to finalize next month a major new analysis of its future surface combatant fleet.... The findings are expected to influence force structure decisions in fiscal year 2021 as well as budget and shipbuilding plans beginning in FY-22. The Future Surface Combatant Force analysis of alternatives [AOA], a 16-month effort, will provide a key input into the Navy’s Integrated Force Structure Assessment…. The AOA, according to a senior official, validated a key Navy hypothesis posed in 2018, that a fleet of unmanned surface vessels packed with sensors or loads of missiles give U.S. commanders more options and complicate the calculus for an adversary.18 Potential New Amphibious Ship Architecture Statements from the Commandant of the Marine Corps suggest strongly that the new FSA might change the Navy’s amphibious ship force to an architecture based on a new amphibious lift target and a new mix of amphibious ships. The current 38-ship amphibious ship force-level goal shown in Table 1 is intended to meet a requirement for having enough amphibious lift to lift the assault echelons of two Marine 16 David B. Larter, “US Navy Moves Toward Unleashing Killer Robot Ships on the World’s Oceans,” Defense News, January 15, 2019. 17 For further discussion, see CRS Report RL32109, Navy DDG-51 and DDG-1000 Destroyer Programs: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke, CRS Report R44972, Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke, and CRS Report R45757, Navy Large Unmanned Surface and Undersea Vehicles: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 18 Jason Sherman, “New Future Surface Combatant Fleet Analysis Validates Contribution of Medium, Large USVs to Fight,” Inside Defense, January 22, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 14 Expeditionary Brigades (MEBs), a requirement known as the 2.0 MEB lift requirement. The 2.0 MEB lift requirement dates to 2006. The translation of this lift requirement into a Marine Corps-preferred force-level goal of 38 ships dates to 2009, and the Navy’s formal incorporation of the 38-ship goal (rather than a more fiscally constrained goal of 33 or 34 ships) into the Navy’s overall ship force-structure goal dates to the 2016 FSA.19 In July 2019, General David H. Berger, the Commandant of the Marine Corps, released a document entitled Commandant’s Planning Guidance that states that the Marine Corps wants to, among other things, move away from the 38-ship amphibious ship force-level goal and the 2.0 MEB lift force-planning metric, and shift to a new and different mix of amphibious ships that includes not only the LHA/LHD-type amphibious assault ships and LPD/LPD-type amphibious ships called for in the 2016 FSA, but other kinds of ships as well, including smaller amphibious ships, ships like the Navy’s Expeditionary Sea Base (ESB) and Expeditionary Fast Transport (EPF) ships (referred to collectively as E-class ships), ships based on commercial-ship hull designs, and unmanned surface vehicles (USVs). The Commandant’s Planning Guidance, which effectively announces a once-in-a-generation change in Marine Corps thinking on this and other issues relating to the Marine Corps, states in part (emphasis as in the original): Our Nation’s ability to project power and influence beyond its shores is increasingly challenged by long-range precision fires; expanding air, surface, and subsurface threats; and the continued degradation of our amphibious and auxiliary ship readiness. The ability to project and maneuver from strategic distances will likely be detected and contested from the point of embarkation during a major contingency. Our naval expeditionary forces must possess a variety of deployment options, including L-class [amphibious ships] and E-class [expeditionary ships] ships, but also increasingly look to other available options such as unmanned platforms, stern landing vessels, other ocean-going connectors, and smaller more lethal and more risk-worthy platforms. We must continue to seek the affordable and plentiful at the expense of the exquisite and few when conceiving of the future amphibious portion of the fleet. We must also explore new options, such as inter-theater connectors and commercially available ships and craft that are smaller and less expensive, thereby increasing the affordability and allowing acquisition at a greater quantity. We recognize that we must distribute our forces ashore given the growth of adversary precision strike capabilities, so it would be illogical to continue to concentrate our forces on a few large ships. The adversary will quickly recognize that striking while concentrated (aboard ship) is the preferred option. We need to change this calculus with a new fleet design of smaller, more lethal, and more risk-worthy platforms. We must be fully integrated with the Navy to develop a vision and a new fleet architecture that can be successful against our peer adversaries while also maintaining affordability. To achieve this difficult task, the Navy and Marine Corps must ensure larger surface combatants possess mission agility across sea control, littoral, and amphibious operations, while we concurrently expand the quantity of more specialized manned and unmanned platforms…. We will no longer use a “2.0 MEB requirement” as the foundation for our arguments regarding amphibious ship building, to determine the requisite capacity of vehicles or other capabilities, or as pertains to the Maritime Prepositioning Force. We will no longer reference the 38-ship requirement memo from 2009, or the 2016 Force Structure Assessment, as the basis for our arguments and force structure justifications. The ongoing 2019 Force Structure Assessment will inform the amphibious requirements based upon this guidance. The global options for amphibs [types of 19 For additional discussion of the 2.0 MEB lift goal and earlier amphibious lift goals dating back to 1980, see Appendix A of CRS Report RL34476, Navy LPD-17 Amphibious Ship Procurement: Background, Issues, and Options for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 15 amphibious ships] include many more options than simply LHAs, LPDs, and LSDs. I will work closely with the Secretary of the Navy and Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) to ensure there are adequate numbers of the right types of ships, with the right capabilities, to meet national requirements. I do not believe joint forcible entry operations (JFEO) are irrelevant or an operational anachronism; however, we must acknowledge that different approaches are required given the proliferation of anti-access/area denial (A2AD) threat capabilities in mutually contested spaces. Visions of a massed naval armada nine nautical miles off-shore in the South China Sea preparing to launch the landing force in swarms of ACVs [amphibious combat vehicles], LCUs [utility landing craft], and LCACs [air-cushioned landing craft]are impractical and unreasonable. We must accept the realities created by the proliferation of precision long-range fires, mines, and other smart-weapons, and seek innovative ways to overcome those threat capabilities. I encourage experimentation with lethal long-range unmanned systems capable of traveling 200 nautical miles, penetrating into the adversary enemy threat ring, and crossing the shoreline—causing the adversary to allocate resources to eliminate the threat, create dilemmas, and further create opportunities for fleet maneuver. We cannot wait to identify solutions to our mine countermeasure needs, and must make this a priority for our future force development efforts…. Over the coming months, we will release a new concept in support of the Navy’s Distributed Maritime Operations (DMO) Concept and the NDS called – Stand-in Forces. The Stand-in Forces concept is designed to restore the strategic initiative to naval forces and empower our allies and partners to successfully confront regional hegemons that infringe on their territorial boundaries and interests. Stand-in Forces are designed to generate technically disruptive, tactical stand-in engagements that confront aggressor naval forces with an array of low signature, affordable, and risk-worthy platforms and payloads. Stand-in forces take advantage of the relative strength of the contemporary defense and rapidly-emerging new technologies to create an integrated maritime defense that is optimized to operate in close and confined seas in defiance of adversary long-range precision “stand-off capabilities.” Creating new capabilities that intentionally initiate stand-in engagements is a disruptive “button hook” in force development that runs counter to the action that our adversaries anticipate. Rather than heavily investing in expensive and exquisite capabilities that regional aggressors have optimized their forces to target, naval forces will persist forward with many smaller, low signature, affordable platforms that can economically host a dense array of lethal and nonlethal payloads. By exploiting the technical revolution in autonomy, advanced manufacturing, and artificial intelligence, the naval forces can create many new risk-worthy unmanned and minimally-manned platforms that can be employed in stand-in engagements to create tactical dilemmas that adversaries will confront when attacking our allies and forces forward.20 20 U.S. Marine Corps, Commandant’s Planning Guidance, 38th Commandant of the Marine Corps, undated, released July 2019, pp. 4-5, 10. See also Megan Eckstein, “New Commandant Berger Sheds 38-Amphib Requirement in Quest to Modernize USMC for High-End Fight,” USNI News, July 18, 2019; Paul McLeary, “Sacred Cows Die As Marine Commandant Changes Course On Amphibs,” Breaking Defense, July 26, 2019; David Ignatius, “The Marines’ New Commandant Has Set the Bar for Real Military Reform,” Washington Post, August 8, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “Marine Planners Using Commandant’s Guidance to Start Crafting Future of the Corps,” USNI News, September 18, 2019; Shawn Snow, “An Unmanned Ship That Can Travel 500 Nautical Miles Without Resupply—the Corps Is Looking at It,” Marine Corps Times, September 19, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “Marines, Navy Both Considering Something Like an Offshore Support Vessel to Supplement Amphibs,” USNI News, September 20, 2019; David Axe, “U.S. Navy and Marine Corps Want Small Ships to Land Troops in a War,” National Interest, September 21, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “Navy, Marines Rethinking How to Build Future Fleet with Unmanned, Expeditionary Ships,” USNI News, September 26, 2019; David Barno and Nora Bensahel, “A Striking New Vision for the marines, and a Wakeup Call for the Other Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 16 A February 20, 2020, press report about a potential new type of stern-landing amphibious ship states: The Navy’s research and development portfolio will devote $30 million to a “next-generation medium amphibious ship design” that will likely be based on an Australian designer’s stern landing vessel…. The Navy and Marines announced in the Fiscal Year 2021 budget request that they will seek a medium amphibious ship that can support the kind of dispersed, agile, constantly relocating force described in the Littoral Operations in Contested Environment (LOCE) and Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations (EABO) concepts the Marine Corps has written, as well as the overarching Distributed Maritime Operations (DMO) from the Navy. According to a budget overview document, “a next-generation medium amphibious ship will be a stern landing vessel to support amphibious ship-to-shore operations.” “FY 2021 funds support concept evaluation/design, industry studies and exploration for a medium-lift intra-theater amphibious support vessel. Efforts include requirements development, systems engineering, naval architecture and marine engineering, and operations research analysis,” reads a justification book that accompanies the budget request. The Navy and Marines had previously cited the Offshore Support Vessel as a possible inspiration for their new design…. However, since that time, Marine Corps planners took another look at the features they’d need on this medium amphibious ship, rather than limiting their talks to existing ship designs, USNI News understands. Those talks led to a realization that they not only wanted a ship that could move Marines around with some range, but they also wanted the ship to be able to beach itself like a landing craft does, to help offload gear and vehicles as needed. These talks led to a new focus on the stern landing vessel designed by Australian company Sea Transport, which could serve as the new inspiration for the medium amphibious vehicle as requirements development and EABO wargaming and simulations take place…. The Navy and Marines are not committed yet to this design or to Sea Transport, but USNI News understands that something like a SLV would combine a surface ship’s ability to have great enough endurance and range to be operationally useful to commanders and a landing craft’s ability to beach itself to offload larger equipment.21 A March 26, 2020, press report stated: The Navy is asking industry for input on a future Light Amphibious Warship, as the Marine Corps recalculates its force design to prepare for a near-peer fight in the Pacific. A recent request for information says the Navy will hold a virtual industry day on April 9…. The Navy anticipates purchasing the first ships in fiscal year 2023, according to slides from the March 4 industry day. A preliminary schedule anticipates the service buying three Services,” War on the Rocks, October 1, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “Berger: Marine 2030 Force Design Is Nearly Complete; Concepts Now Being Modeled, Tested,” USNI News, October 3, 2019; Patrick Tucker, “The Future of the Marines Is Smaller, More Robotic, More Naval,” Defense One, October 3, 2019; Otto Kreisher, “‘Great Power’ Fight Might Require Different Blend of Vessels, But Marines Won’t Shun Amphibious Operations, NDIA Speakers Say,” Seapower, October 24, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “Marines, Navy Considering ‘Alternate’ Amphibs to Supplement Today’s Fleet,” USNI News, October 26, 2019. 21 Megan Eckstein, “Navy Researching New Class of Medium Amphibious Ship, New Logistics Ships,” USNI News, February 20, 2020. See also Rich Abott, “FY 2021 Request Starts Work on Future Amphibs and Logistics Ships,” Defense Daily, February 20, 2020; David Axe, “This Weird Little Ship Could Be the Future of Amphibious Warfare,” National Interest, February 24, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 17 vessels in FY-23, six in FY-24, 10 in FY-25 and nine in FY-26. The Navy also envisions utilizing a commercial design that it could alter for the military.22 A May 5, 2020, press report stated: The U.S. Navy wants to buy as many as 30 of a new class of Light Amphibious Warships that would be significantly smaller and cheaper to operate than its existing fleets of large amphibious ships. The service is already exploring possible designs, including a roll-on-roll-off type with a stern ramp.… Navy officials… said that the “objective number” of Light Amphibious Warships (LAW) it hopes to buy is between 28 and 30 at a briefing for defense industry representatives on Apr. 9, 2020…. The Navy is still in an information-gathering phase, but does already have some key requirements for any potential LAW design, which it expects to be about 200 feet long overall and have 8,000 square feet of cargo space in total. Each LAW will have a crew of no more than 40 sailors and be able to accommodate at least 75 Marines…. The Navy says that it is willing to consider either adapting an existing commercial design, using a commercial hullform as a starting place, or a so-called “Build to Print” ship based on proven design elements and components. The goal in all of these courses of action is to focus on relatively low-risk, low-cost, mature designs, or at least design features, in order to both keep the ships cheap and make them faster and easier to build. The Navy has said it is interested in awarding at least one preliminary design contract by the end of this year with the hope that it could begin buying actual ships as early as late 2022. The service has also indicated that it might be willing to accept ship designs with relatively short expected service lives in order to help keep production costs low and speed up construction. The requirements now say that the LAWs have to have a life span of just 10 years, at a minimum.23 Potential New Aircraft Carrier/Naval Aviation Force Architecture Statements from Navy officials reported in the press beginning in February 2019 indicate that the Navy is currently considering moving to a new aircraft carrier/naval aviation force architecture that might supplement today’s CVNs with smaller and perhaps nonnuclear-powered aircraft carriers.24 According to these press reports, one option for a smaller carrier is the so-called Lighting Carrier, a term referring to an LHA-type amphibious assault ship equipped with an air wing consisting largely of F-35B Joint Strike Fighter (JSFs). (The alternate name for the F-35 is the Lighting II. The B variant of the F-35, which is currently being procured for the Marine Corps, is short 22 Mallory Shellbourne, “Navy begins pursuit of Light Amphibious Warship,” Inside Defense, March 26, 2020. 23 Joseph Trevithick, “Navy Wants To Buy 30 New Light Amphibious Warships To Support Radical Shift In Marine Ops,” The Drive, May 5, 2020. 24 See Rich Abott, “Navy Starts Looking At Carriers After CVN-81,” Defense Daily, February 15, 2019; Richard R. Burges, “Secretary: Navy Discussing Next-Gen Carrier Concepts, Including ‘Lightning Carrier,’” Seapower, October 24, 2019; Wesley Morgan, “Navy Secretary Accuses Congressional Critics of ‘Disinformation’ on Ford Carrier,” Politico Pro, October 23, 2019; Otto Kreisher, “Spencer Lauds Tight Integration of Navy, Marine Forces in ‘Great Power Competition,’” Seapower, October 27, 2019; Sam LaGrone, “Navy Still Mulling Post-F-35C Aviation Combatant; Could be Mix of Manned, Unmanned Aircraft,” USNI News, December 5, 2019; Gina Hawkins, “Acting SecNav Hints at Fewer Aircraft Carriers in Next Ship-Count Plan,” Military.com, January 29, 2020; Sam LaGrone, “Future of U.S. Carrier Fleet Key Issue as New Force Structure Moves Through Pentagon,” USNI News, January 29, 2020; Rich Abott, “Modly: Future Carrier Force Unclear, All Options On The Table,” Defense Daily, January 30, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 18 takeoff, vertical landing [STOVL] variant that can be operated off of ships with flight decks that are shorter than the flight decks of CVNs.) The Navy and Marine Corps have conducted experiments with the Lightning Carrier concept.25 Another option for a smaller carrier is one whose air wing would consist mostly or entirely of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). The Navy in recent years has periodically studied the potential of UAV carriers. The current discussion both inside and outside the Navy over the aircraft carrier to be procured after CVN-81 appears to reflect several considerations, including the following:  concerns over China’s improving capabilities for detecting surface ships and attacking them with anti-ship ballistic missiles (ASBMs) and advanced anti-ship cruise missiles (ASCMs);  the procurement and operating and support (O&S) costs of CVNs and their air wings, particularly in a context of constraints on Navy funding and funding demands from other competing Navy programs; and  the potential capabilities of smaller carriers operating air wings consisting of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and/or F-35B Joint Strike Fighters (i.e., the short-takeoff, vertical landing [STOVL] version of the F-35 now being procured for the Marine Corps). A March 9, 2020, Navy news release stated: Acting Secretary of the Navy Thomas B. Modly announced today he is commissioning a Blue-Ribbon Future Carrier 2030 (FC-2030) Task Force to conduct a six-month study to reimagine the future of the aircraft carrier and carrier-based naval aviation (manned and unmanned) for 2030 and beyond. FC-2030 will be complementary to, and informed by a broad review of national shipbuilding requirements being conducted by Deputy Secretary of Defense David L. Norquist. Navy and Marine Corps uniformed and civilian leadership will be engaged in both efforts. FC-2030 will attract current and former leaders from Congress, leaders from the U.S. shipbuilding and supporting technology industries, current and former Department of Defense leaders, as well as thought leaders at War Colleges, think-tanks, and futurists from around the nation. “The long-term challenges facing our nation and the world demand clear-eyed assessments and hard choices,” said Modly. “Because we have four new Ford carriers under contract, we have some time to reimagine what comes next. Any assessment we do must consider cost, survivability, and the critical national requirement to sustain an industrial base that can produce the ships we need—ships that will contribute to a superior, integrated naval force for the 2030s and far beyond. “Aircraft carrier construction sustains nearly 60,000 skilled jobs in over 46 states,” Modly added. “It can’t be simply turned on and off like a faucet. We must be thoughtful in how we approach changes as they will have lasting impacts on our national industrial competitiveness and employment.” The task force will be led by an Executive Director chosen from within the Department of the Navy’s Secretariat staff, and assisted on a collateral-duty basis by representatives from the Office of Naval Research and the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Warfighting Development. 25 See, for example, Megan Eckstein, “Marines Test ‘Lightning Carrier’ Concept, Control 13 F-35Bs from Multiple Amphibs,” USNI News, October 23, 2019. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 19 Along with an executive director, the FC-2030 Senior Executive Panel will consist of thought leaders with historical records of leading and contributing to large change in maritime defense strategies and programs. Former Senator John Warner of Virginia has agreed to serve as the Honorary Chairman of the Executive Panel. Former Secretary of the Navy John Lehman, former acting Deputy Secretary of Defense Christine Fox, former Deputy Undersecretary of the Navy Seth Cropsey, and former Congressman Randy Forbes have agreed to serve as Executive members of the panel. “Our future strength will be determined as much by the gray matter we apply to our challenges as the gray hulls we build,” said Modly. “We need the best minds from both inside and outside of government focused on this issue.” The study will be conducted with the assistance of the Naval University System (U.S. Naval Academy, Naval War College, Marine Corps University, and Naval Postgraduate School) as well as eligible Federally Funded Research and Development Centers (FFRDCs) and Naval Warfare Centers. The goal at the end of the study is to provide a report to the secretary of the Navy detailing a vision of the competitive global security environment and the role of carrier-based naval aviation in that future context. Considerations will include expected principles of deterrence, global presence missions, protection of American economic security, as well as potential combat with possible adversaries. The study will also define likely constraints of means in terms of future defense budgets, as well as avenue to contemplate future possible technologies not yet invented that could change the stakes of carrier-based naval aviation in all phases of global competition. Finally, the report will provide options for the Department of the Navy in requirements for different various future aircraft (manned and unmanned, nuclear and/or conventional) carriers, to be used in future months and years in developing guidance to industry. The study will also examine how best to utilize and evolve the existing carrier fleet, including the more flexible and adaptable Ford Class, to meet the challenges of advanced long-range weapons that will extend and expand contested areas in the future.26 Potential New Combat Logistics Force (CLF) Architecture The Navy’s FY2020 30-year shipbuilding plan suggests that shifting to a more distributed fleet architecture could increase required numbers of Combat Logistics Force (CLF) ships—meaning the oilers, ammunition ships, and dry cargo ships that transport fuel, ammunition, and supplies Navy combat ships that are operating at sea—and augment today’s CLF ships with additional “smaller, faster, multi-mission transports.”27 Potential New Undersea Force Architecture The new FSA might also change the Navy’s undersea force to a more distributed architecture that includes, in addition to attack submarines (SSNs) and bottom-based sensors, a new element of extra-large unmanned underwater vehicles (XLUUVs), which might be thought of as unmanned 26 Secretary of the Navy Public Affairs, “Acting SECNAV to Commission Future Carrier 2030 Task Force,” Navy News Service, March 9, 2030. See also Paul McCleary, “Beyond The Ford: Navy Studies Next-Gen Carriers EXCLUSIVE,” Breaking Defense, March 5, 2020; Megan Eckstein, “Navy Kicks Off Study of Next-Generation Carriers, Naval Aviation,” USNI News, March 9, 2020; Mallory Shelbourne, “Modly launches 2030 Carrier Task Force,” Inside Defense, March 10, 2030; Megan Eckstein, “Modly: Parallel Fleet Studies Could Reshape Future of Aircraft Carriers,” USNI News, March 12, 2030. 27 U.S. Navy, Report to Congress on the Annual Long-Range Plan for Construction of Naval Vessels for Fiscal Year 2020, pp. 7, 15, 17, 24. The quoted phrase is from page 24. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 20 submarines. In presenting its proposed FY2020 budget, the Navy highlighted its plans for developing and procuring UUVs in coming years.28 Rationale for a More Distributed Fleet Architecture Some observers have long urged the Navy to shift to a more distributed fleet architecture, on the grounds that the Navy’s current architecture—which concentrates much of the fleet’s capability into a relatively limited number of individually larger and more expensive surface ships—is increasingly vulnerable to attack by the improving maritime anti-access/area-denial (A2/AD) capabilities (particularly anti-ship missiles and their supporting detection and targeting systems) of potential adversaries, particularly China.29 Shifting to a more distributed architecture, these observers have argued, would  complicate an adversary’s targeting challenge by presenting the adversary with a larger number of Navy units to detect, identify, and track;  reduce the loss in aggregate Navy capability that would result from the destruction of an individual Navy platform;  give U.S. leaders the option of deploying USVs and UUVs in wartime to sea locations that would be tactically advantageous but too risky for manned ships; and  increase the modularity and reconfigurability of the fleet for adapting to changing mission needs.30 For a number of years, DON leaders acknowledged the views of those observers but continued to support the current fleet architecture. More recently, however, DON leaders appear to have shifted their thinking toward support for moving the fleet to a more distributed architecture. DON leaders appear to have shifted their thinking in favor of a more distributed architecture because they now appear to believe that such an architecture will be  operationally necessary, as the observers have long argued, to respond effectively to the improving maritime A2/AD capabilities of other countries, particularly China;31  technically feasible as a result of advances in technologies for UVs and for networking widely distributed maritime forces that include significant numbers of UVs; and  affordable—no more expensive, and possibly less expensive, than the current architecture, so as to fit within future Navy budgets that Navy officials expect to be flat or declining in real (i.e., inflation-adjusted) terms compared to the Navy’s current budget. The more distributed architecture that Navy leaders now appear to support may differ in its details from distributed architectures that the observers have been advocating, but the general idea 28 For further discussion, see CRS Report R45757, Navy Large Unmanned Surface and Undersea Vehicles: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 29 For more on China’s maritime A2/AD capabilities, see CRS Report RL33153, China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities—Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 30 See, for example, Arthur H. Barber, “Redesign the Fleet,” U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, January 2019. 31 See, for example, David B. Larter, “With China Gunning for Aircraft Carriers, US Navy Says It Must Change How It Fights,” Defense News, December 6, 2019. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 21 of shifting to a more distributed architecture, and of using large UVs as a principal means of achieving that, appears to be similar. The Department of Defense (DOD) states that The FY 2020 budget request diversifies and expands sea power strike capacity through procurement of offensively armed Unmanned Surface Vessels (USVs). The USV investment, paired with increased investment in long-range maritime munitions, represents a paradigm shift towards a more balanced, distributed, lethal, survivable, and cost-imposing naval force that will better exploit adversary weaknesses and project power into contested environments.32 Distributed Maritime Operations (DMO) Shifting to a more distributed force architecture, Navy officials have suggested, could be appropriate for implementing the Navy’s new overarching operational concept, called Distributed Maritime Operations (DMO). The Navy’s FY2020 30-year shipbuilding plan mentions DMO,33 and a December 2018 document from the Chief of Naval Operations states that the Navy will “Continue to mature the Distributed Maritime Operations (DMO) concept and key supporting concepts” and “Design and implement a comprehensive operational architecture to support DMO.”34 While Navy officials have provided few details in public about DMO, then-Chief of Naval Operations Admiral John Richardson, in explaining DMO, stated in December 2018 that Our fundamental force element right now in many instances is the [individual] carrier strike group. We’re going to scale up so our fundamental force element for fighting is at the fleet[-wide] level, and the [individual] strike groups plug into those [larger] numbered fleets. And they will be, the strike groups and the fleet together, will be operating in a distributed maritime operations way.35 In its FY2020 budget submission, the Navy states that “MUSV and LUSV are key enablers of the Navy’s Distributed Maritime Operations (DMO) concept, which includes being able to forward deploy (alone or in teams/swarms), team with individual manned combatants or augment battle groups.”36 The Navy stated in its FY2020 budget submission that a Navy research and development effort focusing on concept generation and concept development (CG/CD) will Continue CG/CD development efforts that carry-over from FY[20]19: Additional concepts and CONOPs [concepts of operation] to be developed in FY[20]20 will be determined through the CG/CD development process and additional external factors. Concepts under consideration include Unmanned Systems in support of DMO, Command and Control in 32 Department of Defense, Office of the Undersecretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Defense Budget Overview, United States Department of Defense, Fiscal Year 2020 Budget Request, March 2019, pp. 4-5 to 4-6. 33 U.S. Navy, Report to Congress on the Annual Long-Range Plan for Construction of Naval Vessels for Fiscal Year 2020, March 2019, pp. 3, 4, 7, 8, 15, 17, 24. 34 U.S. Navy, Chief of Naval Operations, A Design for Maintaining Maritime Superiority, Version 2.0, December 2018, pp. 8, 10. 35 (Chief of Naval Operations Admiral John Richardson, as quoted in Megan Eckstein, “Navy Planning for Gray-Zone Conflict; Finalizing Distributed Maritime Operations for High-End Fight,” USNI News, December 19, 2018.) 36 Department of Defense, Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 Budget Estimates, Navy Justification Book Volume 2 of 5, Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Navy, Budget Activity 4, March 2019, p. 202. See also Kevin Eyer and Steve McJessy, “Operationalizing Distributed Maritime Operations,” Center for International Maritime Security (CIMSEC), March 5, 2019; Christopher H. Popa, et al., Distributed Maritime Operations and Unmanned Systems Tactical Employment, Naval Postgraduate School, June 2018, 171 pp. (Systems Engineering Capstone Report); Lyla Englehorn, Distributed Maritime Operations (DMO) Warfare Innovation Continuum (WIC) Workshop September 2017 After Action Report, Naval Postgraduate School, December 2017, 99 pp. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 22 support of DMO, Offensive Mine Warfare, Targeting in support of DMO, and Advanced Autonomous/Semi-autonomous Sustainment Systems.37 The Navy also stated in its FY2020 budget submission that a separate Navy research and development effort for fleet experimentation activities will include activities that “address key DMO concept action plan items such as the examination of Fleet Command and Maritime Operation Center (MOC) capabilities and the employment of unmanned systems in support of DMO.”38 A May 16, 2019, press report states The Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Warfare Systems said Wednesday [May 15] he thinks the upcoming Force Structure Assessment (FSA) will focus on smaller surface combatants as the service looks to build up to a 355-ship Navy. “I certainly don’t see that [FSA fleet] number going down, but it is going to be more reflective of the DMO [Distributed Maritime Operations] construct and it includes not just the battle force ships, but the logistics ships, the trainers, the maritime operations centers, everything that we pull together to keep this machine running,” Vice Adm. William Merz said during an event at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. “What we think is going to happen with this FSA is there will be more emphasis on the smaller surface combatants, mostly because the frigate looks like it’s coming along very well and it’s going to be more lethal than we had planned,” Merz said. Merz explained the likely outcome by comparing it to how Rear Adm. Ron Boxall, director of surface warfare (N96), talks about how the Navy has too many large surface combatants and needs to get more balanced. “When you look at the lethality of the frigate, yeah that makes sense. So we’ll see how the FSA handles the lethality of that – and then how does that bleed over into the other accounts,” Merz said…. Merz revealed there will also be “a hard look at the logistics side” because while some logistics ships count as battle force ships some do not. He said the FSA will make an opinion on the non-battle force logistics vessels as well because it does not limit itself to those strict definitions. The FSA will also take into account the evolution of the air wing, the length of the air wing, the range of the air wing on carriers and amphibious vessels, and how the Navy will cover its responsibilities.39 Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations (EABO) In parallel with DMO, the Marine Corps has developed a new operational concept, called Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations (EABO), that appears related to the earlier-quoted passage from the Commandant’s Planning Guidance about changing the amphibious lift goal and the amphibious force architecture. Regarding EABO, the Commandant’s Planning Guidance states the following (emphasis as in the original): The 2016 Marine Corps Operating Concept (MOC) predates the current set of national strategy and guidance documents, but it was prescient in many ways. It directed partnering 37 Department of Defense, Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 Budget Estimates, Navy Justification Book Volume 2 of 5, Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Navy, Budget Activity 4, March 2019, p. 1385. See also pp. 1382, 1384, 1443, 1445. 38 Department of Defense, Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 Budget Estimates, Navy Justification Book Volume 4 of 5, Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Navy Budget Activity 6, March 2019, p. 290. 39 Rich Abott, “Merz Says FSA To Emphasize Smaller Ships,” Defense Daily, May 16, 2019. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 23 with the Navy to develop two concepts, Littoral Operations in a Contested Environment (LOCE) and Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations (EABO) that nest exceptionally well with the current strategic guidance. It is time to move beyond the MOC itself, however, and partner with the Navy to complement LOCE and EABO with classified, threat-specific operating concepts that describe how naval forces will conduct the range of missions articulated in our strategic guidance…. EABO complement the Navy’s Distributed Maritime Operations Concept and will inform how we approach missions against peer adversaries…. EABO are driven by the aforementioned adversary deployment of long-range precision fires designed to support a strategy of “counter-intervention” directed against U.S. and coalition forces. EABO, as an operational concept, enables the naval force to persist forward within the arc of adversary long-range precision fires to support our treaty partners with combat credible forces on a much more resilient and difficult to target forward basing infrastructure. EABO are designed to restore force resiliency and enable the persistent naval forward presence that has long been the hallmark of naval forces. Most significantly, EABO reverse the cost imposition that determined adversaries seek to impose on the joint force. EABO guide an apt and appropriate adjustment in future naval force development to obviate the significant investment our adversaries have made in long-range precision fires. Potential adversaries intend to target our forward fixed and vulnerable bases, as well as deep water ports, long runways, large signature platforms, and ships. By developing a new expeditionary naval force structure that is not dependent on concentrated, vulnerable, and expensive forward infrastructure and platforms, we will frustrate enemy efforts to separate U.S. Forces from our allies and interests. EABO enable naval forces to partner and persist forward to control and deny contested areas where legacy naval forces cannot be prudently employed without accepting disproportionate risk…. In February of 2019, the Commandant and Chief of Naval Operations co-signed the concept for EABO. The ideas contained in this document are foundational to our future force development efforts and are applicable in multiple scenarios.40 April 2020 Press Report of DOD Assessment on Revised Navy Force-Level Goal An April 20, 2020, press report stated: An internal Office of the Secretary of Defense assessment calls for the Navy to cut two aircraft carriers from its fleet, freeze the large surface combatant fleet of destroyers and cruisers around current levels and add dozens of unmanned or lightly manned ships to the inventory, according to documents obtained by Defense News. The study calls for a fleet of nine carriers, down from the current fleet of 11, and for 65 unmanned or lightly manned surface vessels. The study calls for a surface force of between 80 and 90 large surface combatants, and an increase in the number of small surface combatants—between 55 and 70, which is substantially more than the Navy currently operates. The assessment is part of an ongoing DoD-wide review of Navy force structure and seem to echo what Defense Secretary Mark Esper has been saying for months: the Defense Department wants to begin de-emphasizing aircraft carriers as the centerpiece of the Navy's 40 U.S. Marine Corps, Commandant’s Planning Guidance, 38th Commandant of the Marine Corps, undated, released July 2019, pp. 9, 11, 19. See also Jim Lacey, “The ‘Dumbest Concept Ever’ Just Might Win Wars,” War on the Rocks, July 29, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “How to Seize Islands, Set Up a Forward Refueling Point: Marine Corps Recipes for Exspeditionary Operations,” USNI News, September 13, 2019. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 24 force projection and put more emphasis on unmanned technologies that can be more easily sacrificed in a conflict and can achieve their missions more affordably…. There are about 90 cruisers and destroyers in the fleet: the study recommended retaining at least 80 but keeping about as many as the Navy currently operates at the high end. The Navy’s small surface combatant program is essentially the 20 littoral combat ships in commission today, with another 15 under contract, as well as the 20 next-generation frigates, which would get to the minimum number in the assessment of 55 small combatants, with the additional 15 presumably being more frigates.41 Issues for Congress COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Impact on Shipbuilding Programs, Shipyards, Supplier Firms, and Employees One issue for Congress concerns the potential impact of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation on the execution of Navy (and Coast Guard) shipbuilding programs, on the shipyards and associated supplier firms executing these programs, and the employees of these firms. The potential for the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation to impact work efforts is not unique to Navy (and Coast Guard) shipbuilding—it is a possibility faced by many if not all DOD contractors.42 The discussion in this report focuses on potential impacts on Navy (and Coast Guard) shipbuilding.43 Aspects of the discussion below might also apply to impacts of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation on government-operated and private-sector shipyards that overhaul, repair, and maintain Navy (and Coast Guard) ships, their associated supplier firms, and their employees. Potential Impact Operations at shipyards and associated supplier firms could be affected by the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation if employees remain home rather than report to work because they are ill with or have tested positive for the virus, are remaining home to maintain social distancing, are taking care of children who have been sent home from school, or are taking care of family members who have become ill from the virus. Impacts on operations at shipbuilding supplier firms could affect operations at the shipyards, even if staffing at the shipyards themselves is not 41 David B. Larter, “Defense Department Study Calls for Cutting 2 of the US Navy’s Aircraft Carriers,” Defense News, April 20, 2020. 42 See, for example, Valerie Insinna, “F-35 Deliveries Could Slow Down, as COVID-19 Jolts Lockheed’s Supply Chain,” Defense News, April 21, 2020; Ben Werner, “COVID-19-Related Supply Chain Disruptions Slowing F-35 Production,” USNI News, April 21, 2020; Jacqueline Feldscher, “Lockheed Concerned About F-35 Production Due to Coronavirus,” Politico Pro, April 21, 2020; Aaron Mehta, “Pentagon bracing for three-month slowdown on major defense equipment,” Defense News, April 20, 2020; Paul McCleary, “Pentagon Pumps $3B Into Industry As COVID-19 Delays Loom,” Breaking Defense, April 20, 2020; Megan Eckstein, “DoD: Shipbuilding, Aviation Hardest-Hit Sectors in Defense Industrial Base by COVID Pandemic,” USNI News, April 20, 2020; Vivienne Machi, “DoD Expecting Three-Month Delays for Major Acquisition Programs,” Defense Daily, April 20, 2020; Lara Seligman, “Pentagon Expects 3-Month Delay to Major Acquisition Programs Due to Virus,” Politico Pro, April 20, 2020 Marcus Weisgerber, “USN, USAF Acquisition Chiefs Talk COVID; Shipbuilder Staggers Shifts; Contractor Accidentally Ejects Himself; and More…,” Defense One, April 16, 2020; Jon Harper, “Pandemic: Coronavirus Rattles the Defense Industrial Base,” National Defense, April 14, 2020. 43 CRS reports on Coast Guard shipbuilding programs include CRS Report R42567, Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke, and CRS Report RL34391, Coast Guard Polar Security Cutter (Polar Icebreaker) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 25 substantially affected, due to reduced or delayed deliveries to the shipyards of supplier-provided components and materials.44 Delays in building ships and fabricating their components could put shipyards and supplier firms at risk of not being able to meet their contractual obligations, which in turn could affect their financial situations unless the government were to provide relief. Shipyard and supplier-firm employees who report to work could face a risk of exposure to the virus, while those who are sent home by their employer could face a loss of income for a period lasting weeks or months. Although all U.S. Navy (and Coast Guard) shipbuilding programs could be affected, one shipbuilding program of potential particular note in this connection is Columbia-class ballistic missile submarine program, due to the program’s high priority (it is the Navy’s top program priority), the program’s tight schedule for designing and building the lead boat in time for the boat to be ready to conduct its scheduled first strategic nuclear deterrent patrol in 2031, and the potential consequences for the nation’s strategic nuclear deterrent posture if the lead boat is not ready in time to conduct that patrol. The COVID-19 (coronavirus) risk to the schedule for designing and building the lead boat in the Columbia-class program is discussed in the CRS report on that program.45 Past Examples of Assistance to Shipyards and Supplier Firms Potential options for Congress for providing assistance to affected shipyards and supplier firms could take various forms. Some past instances of assistance relating to shipbuilding include the following:  Following Hurricane Katrina in August 2005, Congress provided $1.7 billion in reallocated emergency supplemental appropriations to pay estimated higher shipbuilding costs for 11 Navy ships under construction at the Ingalls shipyard in Pascagoula, MS, and the Avondale shipyard upriver from New Orleans, LA.46 44 For articles discussing DOD supplier firms during the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation, see Justin Doubleday, “Pentagon ‘Learning More Than Ever’ About Supply Chain Vulnerabilities During COVID-19 Crisis,” Inside Defense, April 28, 2020; Jacqueline Feldscher, “Parts of Defense Supply Chain Under Pressure Despite Federal, Industry Aid,” Politico Pro, April 21, 2020; Valerie Insinna and Aaron Mehta, “The Pentagon’s Supply Chain Faces An Economy Under Siege,” Defense News, April 8, 2020. 45 See CRS Report R41129, Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 46 See CRS Report RS22239, Emergency Supplemental Appropriations for Hurricane Katrina Relief, by Keith Bea, August 22, 2006, p. 6. The report states: Citing the need for “special oversight” of these shipbuilding funds dedicated to cover property damage, cleanup, idle payroll, and business disruption (that may also be covered by shipbuilders’ insurance), the appropriators added report language requiring that the Navy or Army, as applicable, submit a report to the Appropriations Committees “certifying” that the costs were related to the hurricanes and would not be paid for by FEMA or the shipbuilders’ insurers. (U.S. House, Conference Committees 2005, Making Appropriations for the Department of Defense for the Fiscal Year Ending September 30, 2006, and for Other Purposes, conference report to accompany H.R. 2863, H.Rept. 109-359, 109th Cong., 1st sess. [Washington: GPO, 2005], p. 496.) See also CRS Report RL33298, FY2006 Supplemental Appropriations: Iraq and Other International Activities; Additional Hurricane Katrina Relief, Paul M. Irwin, Coordinator, Larry Nowels, Coordinator, June 15, 2006, pp. 59-66; and CRS Report RL33197, Reallocation of Hurricane Katrina Emergency Appropriations: Defense and Other Issues, Coordinated by Amy Belasco, December 15, 2005, pp. 9-14. (These CRS reports are out of print and available for congressional clients from the author of this report.) Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 26  The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009 (H.R. 1/P.L. 111-5 of February 17, 2009), which was enacted in response to the 2008-2009 recession, appropriated $100 million for the Maritime Administration (MARAD) to be used for making supplemental grants to small shipyards as authorized under Section 3508 of the Duncan Hunter National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2009 (S. 3001/P.L. 110-417 of October 14, 2008) or 46 U.S.C. 54101.47  Following Hurricane Michael in October 2018, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), of which the Coast Guard is a part, announced on October 11, 2019, that DHS had granted extraordinary contractual relief to Eastern Shipbuilding Group (ESG) of Panama City, FL, the builder of the first of the Coast Guard’s new Offshore Patrol Cutters (OPCs), under P.L. 85-804 as amended (50 U.S.C. 1431-1435). P.L. 85-804, originally enacted in 1958, authorizes certain federal agencies to provide certain types of extraordinary relief to contractors who are encountering difficulties in the performance of federal contracts or subcontracts relating to national defense.48 ESG reportedly submitted a request for extraordinary relief on June 30, 2019, after ESG’s shipbuilding facilities were damaged by Hurricane Michael.49 The past instances listed above do not necessarily represent the full range of options available to Congress for assisting shipyards and supplier firms—additional options might be available through the Defense Production Act (DPA) or other federal authorities.50 47 Section 3508 of P.L. 110-417 amended the U.S. Code to add Section 54101 to Title 46, which establishes a program for assistance for small shipyards and maritime communities. 48 50 U.S.C. 1431 states in part: The President may authorize any department or agency of the Government which exercises functions in connection with the national defense, acting in accordance with regulations prescribed by the President for the protection of the Government, to enter into contracts or into amendments or modifications of contracts heretofore or hereafter made and to make advance payments thereon, without regard to other provisions of law relating to the making, performance, amendment, or modification of contracts, whenever he deems that such action would facilitate the national defense. The authority conferred by this section shall not be utilized to obligate the United States in an amount in excess of $50,000 without approval by an official at or above the level of an Assistant Secretary or his Deputy, or an assistant head or his deputy, of such department or agency, or by a Contract Adjustment Board established therein. For more on P.L. 85-804 as amended, see CRS Report 76-261, Extraordinary Contractual Relief Under Public Law 85-804, April 28, 1976, by Andrew C. Mayer. The report was prepared at the request of the House Armed Services Committee and converted by the committee into a committee print (70-905 O), dated May 10, 1976, that can be viewed at https://ufdc.ufl.edu/AA00022546/00001/1j. See also David H. Peirez, “Public Law 85-804: Contractual Relief for the Government Contractor,” Administrative Law Review, vol. 16 (Summer 1964): 248-264, accessed October 11, 2019, at https://www.jstor.org/stable/40708469; and “Presidential Power: Public Law 85-804 (50 U.S.C. §§ 1431-35),” Brennan Center for Justice, undated, accessed October 11, 2019, at https://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/analysis/50%20USC%201431-1435.pdf. (Although it is undated, it appears to have been written no earlier than 2014, as it includes three references to the year 2014, including one that states, “As of 2014….”) The text of P.L. 85-804 as originally enacted is posted at https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-72/pdf/STATUTE-72-Pg972.pdf. 49 For more on the extraordinary contractual relief provided to ESG under P.L. 85-804, see CRS Report R42567, Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 50 For more on the DPA in the context of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation, see CRS Report R43767, The Defense Production Act of 1950: History, Authorities, and Considerations for Congress, by Michael H. Cecire and Heidi M. Peters, and CRS Insight IN11231, The Defense Production Act (DPA) and COVID-19: Key Authorities and Policy Considerations, by Michael H. Cecire and Heidi M. Peters. See also Scott F. Roybal and Laura A. Alexander, “Coronavirus and its Implications for Government Contractors,” National Law Review, March 9, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 27 Potential Oversight Questions Potential oversight questions for Congress include the following:  How might the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation affect the execution of Navy (and Coast Guard) shipbuilding programs, the shipyards and associated supplier firms executing these programs, and the employees of these firms?  How well do Navy (and Coast Guard) officials understand these potential impacts?  What are Navy (and Coast Guard) officials doing to anticipate, monitor, and respond to this situation?  Does Congress have adequate visibility into the impact of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation on the execution of Navy (and Coast Guard) shipbuilding programs, the shipyards and associated supplier firms executing these programs, and the employees of these firms? Are the Navy and industry doing enough to brief and keep Congress up to date on the situation? Additional Background Information For additional background information on the potential impact of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation on the execution of Navy (and Coast Guard) shipbuilding programs, on the shipyards and associated supplier firms executing these programs, and the employees of these firms, see Appendix J (which presents the texts of letters from Members of Congress) and Appendix K (which presents DOD and Navy memoranda and excerpts from press reports). COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Impact on U.S. Defense Strategy and Budgets Another potential oversight issue for Congress is how the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation could affect future U.S. defense strategy and budgets, and consequently Navy planning for future fleet size and architecture. As discussed in another CRS report,51 some (but not all) observers argue that the COVID-19 pandemic could lead to a revised definition of U.S. national security that is less military-centric than traditional definitions, and that the substantial federal expenditures being made to support the U.S. economy during the pandemic stay-at-home period, and the effect that these expenditures will have on the federal budget deficit and U.S. debt, could lead to greater constraints in coming years on U.S. defense spending levels. Such changes, some (but not all) observers argue, could lead to potentially significant changes in U.S. defense strategy and in funding levels for the Navy, which in turn could lead to changes in Navy force-level goals and associated shipbuilding programs that in theory could go beyond (or take Navy planning in a direction different from) those contemplated in the INFSA. 51 CRS Report R46336, COVID-19: Potential Implications for International Security Environment—Overview of Issues and Further Reading for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke, Kathleen J. McInnis, and Michael Moodie. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 28 FY2021 Budget’s Treatment of CVN-81, LPD-31, and LHA-9 Procurement Dates A potentially significant institutional issue for Congress concerns the treatment in the Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget of the procurement dates of the aircraft carrier CVN-81 and the amphibious ships LPD-31 and LHA-9. As discussed earlier, the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission presents the aircraft carrier CVN-81 as a ship that Congress procured in FY2020. Consistent with congressional action on the Navy’s FY2019 budget regarding the procurement of CVN-81 (see Appendix I), this CRS report treats CVN-81 as a ship that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and provided procurement funding for) in FY2019. As also discussed earlier, the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission presents LPD-31, an LPD-17 Flight II amphibious ship, as a ship requested for procurement in FY2021, and the amphibious assault ship LHA-9 as a ship projected for procurement in FY2023. Consistent with congressional action on the Navy’s FY2020 budget regarding the procurement of LPD-31 and LHA-9 (see Appendix I), this CRS report treats LPD-31 and LHA-9 as ships that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and provided procurement funding for) in FY2020. Potential oversight issues for Congress include the following:  By presenting CVN-81 as a ship that was procured in FY2020 (instead of a ship that was procured in FY2019), LPD-31 as a ship requested for procurement in FY2021 (instead of a ship that was procured in FY2020), and LHA-9 as a ship projected for procurement in FY2023 (instead of a ship that was procured in FY2020), is DOD, in its FY2021 budget submission, disregarding or mischaracterizing the actions of Congress regarding the procurement dates of these three ships? If so:  Is DOD doing this to inflate the apparent number of ships requested for procurement in FY2021 and the apparent number of ships included in the five-year shipbuilding plan?  Could this establish a precedent for DOD in the future to ignore or mischaracterize the actions of Congress regarding the procurement or program-initiation dates for other Navy ships, other Navy programs, other DOD programs, or other federal programs? If so, what implications might that have for the preservation and use of Congress’s power of the purse under Article 1 of the Constitution, and for maintaining Congress as a co-equal branch of government relative to the executive branch? Reprogramming of FY2020 Funding for LHA-9 and EPF Ship On February 13, 2020 (i.e., three days after submitting its proposed FY2021 defense budget), the Administration submitted a reprogramming action that transfers about $3.8 billion in DOD funding to Department of Homeland Security (DHS) counter-drug activities, commonly reported to mean the construction of the southern border wall. Included in this action is $650 million that Congress appropriated in FY2020 for the amphibious assault ship LHA-9, and $261 million that Congress appropriated in FY2020 Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 29 for an expeditionary fast transport (EPF) ship.52 The $650 million represents about 17% (i.e., about one-sixth) of the estimated cost of LHA-9; the $261 million is the full procurement cost of the EPF. The reprogramming action acknowledges that LHA-9 and the EPF ship are congressional special interest items, meaning items that Congress funded at levels above what DOD had requested. (The Navy’s FY2020 budget submission requested no funding for either ship.) The reprogramming action characterizes the $650 million as “early to current programmatic need,” even though it would be needed for a ship whose construction would begin in FY2020. In discussing its FY2021 budget submission, Navy officials characterize LHA-9 not as ship whose procurement the Navy is proposing to delay from FY2020 to FY2023, but as a ship whose procurement the Navy is proposing to accelerate from FY2024 (the ship’s procurement date under the Navy’s FY2020 budget submission) to FY2023. The reprogramming action characterizes the EFP as “excess to current [Navy] programmatic need. The procurement exceeds the [Navy’s] program-of-record requirement.” Potential oversight issues for Congress include the following:  By reprogramming the funding for LHA-9 and the EPF ship to another purpose, is DOD, in its FY2021 budget submission, disregarding the expressed intent of Congress regarding the procurement of these two ships?  If so, could this establish a precedent for DOD or other parts of the executive branch in the future to disregard the intent of Congress regarding the procurement or program-initiation dates for other Navy ships, other Navy programs, other DOD programs, or other federal programs? What implications might that have for the preservation and use of Congress’s power of the purse under Article 1 of the Constitution, and for maintaining Congress as a co-equal branch of government relative to the executive branch? Delay in Submission of FY2021 30-year Shipbuilding Plan Another issue for Congress concerns the delay in the submission of the Navy’s FY2021 30-year (FY2021-FY2050) shipbuilding plan, and the impact this delay may have on Congress’s ability to assess and mark up the Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget. 10 U.S.C. 231 states that DOD “shall include” the 30-year shipbuilding plan “with the defense budget materials for a fiscal year.” Navy officials have stated that the 30-year shipbuilding plan, like the INFSA, is being reviewed by the Office of the Secretary of Defense.53 In late-February, Acting Secretary of the Navy Thomas Modly said it could be submitted within “a couple of months.”54 The 30-year shipbuilding plan is intended to provide Congress with supporting information for assessing and marking up the Navy’s proposed shipbuilding program. The discussion of the 30-year plan in this CRS report is one reflection of the role that the 30-year shipbuilding plan plays in that regard. 52 Department of Defense, Reprogramming action (form DD 1415), DOD Serial Number FY 20-01 RA, February 13, 2020, page 3 of 5. 53 See, for example, Sam LaGrone, “SECDEF Esper Holds Back 30-Year Shipbuilding Outlook, New 355-Ship Plan Ahead of HASC Testimony,” USNI News, February 25, 2020. 54 See, for example, Mallory Shelbourne, “Modly Says He Expects to Submit Shipbuilding Plan ‘In a Couple of Months,’” Inside Defense, February 27, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 30 In addition to requiring DOD to submit the 30-year plan with its annual defense budget materials, 10 U.S.C. 231 requires CBO to submit, within 60 days of the submission of the Navy’s 30-year shipbuilding plan, a report assessing the cost and prospective affordability of the plan. As reflected in this CRS report, CBO’s report assessing the Navy’s 30-year shipbuilding plan forms a significant element of the annual discussion of the Navy’s shipbuilding program. A delay in the submission of the 30-year shipbuilding plan will lead to a delay in the submission of CBO’s report. CRS and CBO testified regarding the value to Congress of the 30-year shipbuilding plan at a June 1, 2011, hearing before the Oversight and Investigations subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee.55 In its testimony, CRS stated: The main purpose of the 30-year shipbuilding plan is to support effective congressional oversight of DOD plans for Navy shipbuilding by giving Congress information that is important to performing this oversight function but not available in the five-year data of the Future Years Defense Plan (FYDP). The 30-year plan supports effective congressional oversight of DOD plans for Navy shipbuilding in at least five ways:  The 30-year shipbuilding plan enables Congress to assess whether the Navy intends to procure enough ships to achieve and maintain its stated ship force-level goals….  The 30-year shipbuilding plan helps Congress determine whether there is a fundamental imbalance between Navy program goals and projected Navy resources…  The 30-year shipbuilding plan helps Congress to assess whether DOD ship procurement plans are likely to be affordable within future defense budgets….  Supporting information provided in conjunction with the 30-year shipbuilding plan enables Congress to assess whether Navy ship procurement planning is reasonable in terms of assumed service lives for existing ships and estimated procurement costs for new ships….  The 30-year shipbuilding plan enables Congress to assess the potential industrial-base implications of DOD’s intentions for ship procurement.56 In its testimony, CBO similarly stated: The 30-year ship and aircraft plans benefit Congressional oversight and decisions about funding in at least three different ways:  Thirty-year plans may reveal cumulative long-term effects of annual appropriation decisions that may not be apparent from a shorter perspective.  Such plans may also reveal imbalances between long-term objectives for inventories and projected budgetary resources.  The plans provide information on DoD’s assumptions about the service lives of major weapons systems and how those assumptions may affect its inventory goals.57 55 See Statement of Ronald O’Rourke, Specialist in Naval Affairs, Congressional Research Service, before the House Armed Services Committee Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations hearing on the Department of Defense’s 30-Year Aviation and Shipbuilding Plans, June 1, 2011, 8 pp., and Congressional Budget Office, Statement of Eric J. Labs, Senior Analyst for Naval Forces and Weapons, [on the] The Value of 30-Year Defense Procurement Plans for Congressional Oversight and Decisionmaking before the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Committee on Armed Services, U.S. House of Representatives, June 1, 2011, 7 pp. 56 Statement of Ronald O’Rourke, Specialist in Naval Affairs, Congressional Research Service, before the House Armed Services Committee Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations hearing on the Department of Defense’s 30-Year Aviation and Shipbuilding Plans, June 1, 2011, pp. 1-2. 57 Congressional Budget Office, Statement of Eric J. Labs, Senior Analyst for Naval Forces and Weapons, [on the] The Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 31 Adequacy of Proposed FY2021 Shipbuilding Budget and Five-Year Shipbuilding Plan Another issue for Congress concerns the adequacy of the proposed FY2021 shipbuilding budget, which requests the procurement of seven new ships, and the FY2021 five-year shipbuilding plan, which includes 42 new ships, relative to the Navy’s goal of attaining a fleet of 355 ships within 10 years. Potential oversight issues for Congress include the following:  Would the procurement of seven new ships in FY2021, and a total of 42 ships over the five-year period FY2021-FY2025, be consistent with a goal of attaining a fleet of 355 ships within 10 years? In conjunction with this level of new ship procurement, to what degree would the Navy need to extend the service lives of existing ships to attain a fleet of 355 new ships within 10 years? How would the mix of that 355-ship fleet compare to the mix called for in the 2016 FSA (shown in Table 1)?  Within the Navy’s FY2021 budget top line and its projected funding levels through FY2025, does the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission strike the proper balance between funding for new ship procurement and funding for other Navy priorities, such as restoring eroded ship readiness and improving fleet lethality? Is there a mismatch between the Navy’s budget top line and the Navy’s desire to achieve a 355-ship fleet within 10 years while also adequately funding other Navy priorities? How INFSA Will Change Fleet Architecture, 355-Ship Goal, Mix of Ships to Be Procured, and Distribution of Shipbuilding Work Another issue for Congress is how the INFSA will change the Navy’s fleet architecture, the Navy’s current 355-ship force-level goal, the mix of Navy ships to be procured, and the distribution of Navy shipbuilding work among the nation’s shipyards. Affordability of 30-Year Shipbuilding Plan As mentioned earlier, the Navy has not yet submitted its FY2021 30-year (FY2021-FY2050) shipbuilding plan. As a placeholder pending the submission of that plan, the discussion below of specific points regarding the affordability of the Navy’s 30-year shipbuilding plan is based on the Navy’s FY2020 30-year plan. Overview Another oversight issue for Congress has concerned the prospective affordability of the Navy’s 30-year shipbuilding plan. This issue has been a matter of oversight focus for several years, and particularly since the enactment in 2011 of the Budget Control Act, or BCA (S. 365/P.L. 112-25 of August 2, 2011). Aspects of this issue could change if the INFSA shifts the Navy to a new fleet architecture and a changed mix of ships to be procured in coming years. The discussion below is based on the Navy’s current fleet architecture. Value of 30-Year Defense Procurement Plans for Congressional Oversight and Decisionmaking before the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Committee on Armed Services, U.S. House of Representatives, June 1, 2011, p. 1. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 32 Based on the Navy’s current fleet architecture, observers have been particularly concerned about the 30-year shipbuilding plan’s prospective affordability during the decade or so from the mid-2020s through the mid-2030s, when the plan calls for procuring Columbia-class ballistic missile submarines as well as replacements for large numbers of retiring attack submarines, cruisers, and destroyers.58 Figure 2 shows, in a graphic form, the Navy’s estimate of the annual amounts of funding that would be needed to implement the Navy’s FY2020 30-year shipbuilding plan. The figure shows that during the period from the mid-2020s through the mid-2030s, the Navy estimates that implementing the FY2020 30-year shipbuilding plan would require roughly $24 billion per year in shipbuilding funds. Figure 2. Navy Estimate of Funding Requirements for FY2020 30-Year Plan Constant FY2019 dollars, in millions Source: U.S. Navy, Report to Congress on the Annual Long-Range Plan for Construction of Naval Vessels for Fiscal Year 2020, Figure A4-1 on page 18. Navy officials have stated at hearings on the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission that achieving and supporting a 355-ship fleet over the next 10 years would require increasing the Navy’s budget by a cumulative total of $120 billion to $130 billion over the next ten years, or an average of $12 billion to $13 billion per year. This figure, Navy officials have stated, includes not only the cost of procuring new ships, but costs associated with crewing, arming, operating, and maintaining a 355-ship fleet.59 To help generate some of this funding from within the Navy’s own 58 The Navy’s 30-year plans in recent years have spotlighted for policymakers the substantial increase in Navy shipbuilding funding that would be required to implement the 30-year plan during the decade or so from the mid-2020s through the mid-2030s. As discussed in CRS testimony in 2011, a key function of the 30-year shipbuilding plan is to alert policymakers well ahead of time to periods of potentially higher funding requirements for Navy shipbuilding. (See Statement of Ronald O’Rourke, Specialist in Naval Affairs, Congressional Research Service, before the House Armed Services Committee, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, hearing on the Department of Defense’s 30-Year Aviation and Shipbuilding Plans, June 1, 2011, 8 pp.) 59 See, for example, Ben Werner, “SECNAV Modly: Navy Needs Additional $120 Billion To Build 355-Ship Fleet By 2030,” USNI News, February 27, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 33 budget, Acting Secretary of the Navy Thomas Modly in February 2020 announced that the Navy would conduct a “Stem to Stern” review of its spending with the aim of identifying $40 billion over the next five years (i.e., an average of $8 billion per year) that can be redirected from lower-priority efforts to the goal of achieving and maintaining a larger fleet.60 Prior to this—in September and October 2019—Navy officials had stated that if Navy budgets in coming years remain at current levels in real (i.e., inflation-adjusted terms), the Navy would not be able to properly maintain a fleet of more than 302 to 310 ships. A September 16, 2019, press report quoted Under Secretary of the Navy Thomas Modly as stating in a speech on that date: “I will tell you it is going to be very, very difficult for us to get to that number [355 ships] in any reasonable amount of time.” According to the press report, Modly stated: “If you look at our funding in the [Navy] and straight line that on our current budget projections, we can probably get to about 305 to 308 ships and sustain that over time without a significant increase in our budget.” The press report stated that “the under secretary said the service [i.e., the Navy] would likely need $20 billion to $30 billion more annually to achieve a 355-ship fleet ‘quickly, and when I say “quickly” I mean within five to 10 years.’”61 An October 27, 2019, press report, reporting on remarks made by Under Secretary Modly on October 25, stated The size of the current fleet, the high cost of new ships and the likely lack of growth in future budgets will make it difficult for the Navy to reach the current goal of a 355-ship battle fleet, the Navy’s number two civilian leader [Modly] said…. Modly went through the top 10 issues that keep him up at night, three of which dealt with the problem of buying and sustaining enough ships to get the size fleet the U.S. Navy will need for the possible future conflicts. The effort to get from the current 290-ship force to the 355 goal faces “a math problem,” he said, because future defense budgets are not likely to grow enough to buy all those ships.62 An October 28, 2019, press report stated The Navy is unlikely to field a 355-ship fleet in the near- or even mid-term future if funding doesn’t change dramatically, the department’s top leadership said during a pair of appearances last week. The 355-ship Navy is a nice target; however, ship readiness is more critical for the service as it plans how the fleet will look in the future, Vice Chief of Naval Operations Adm. Robert Burke said Friday [October 25] while speaking with reporters at the Military Reporters and Editors conference. “Will we get to 355-ships?” Burke said. “I think with today’s fiscal situation, where the Navy’s top line is right now, we can keep around 305 to 310 ships whole, properly manned, properly maintained, properly equipped, and properly ready.”… 60 See, for example, Megan Eckstein and Ben Werner, “Acting SECNAV Kicks off Navy ‘Night Court’ Cost Savings Drive with Aim to Save $40 Billion,” USNI News, February 18, 2020; Paul McLeary, “Navy Looks to Slash $40B To Build Bigger Fleet,” Breaking Defense, February 18, 2020; Justin Katz, “Modly Announces Navy Program Review Seeking $40B in Savings,” Inside Defense, February 19, 2020; Ben Werner, “Navy $40 Billion Savings Effort Linked to Force Structure Assessment,” USNI News, February 21, 2020; Sam LaGrone, “Navy Mulling Taking Sailors off Forward Deployed Ships as Part of $40B Savings Drive,” USNI News, March 11, 2020. 61 Justin Katz, “Modly Acknowledges 355 Ships Won’t Happen in ‘Reasonable’ Amount of Time,” Inside Defense, September 16, 2019. 62 Otto Kreisher, “Modly Doubts Future Budgets Will Allow for 355-Ship Fleet,” Seapower, October 27, 2019. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 34 “If our top line does not go up, if it remains where it is now and is projected to remain in the future defense plans, that’s about where we can get to and do it right, in terms of man those ships and maintain them and have all the ordnance for them and generate readiness,” Burke said. “We would need an increased top line.”63 In January 2020, Admiral Michael Gilday, the Chief of Naval Operations, stated that fully funding the Navy’s program goals, including the attainment of a 355-ship fleet, would require allocating a larger share of DOD’s budget to the Navy.64 Concern Regarding Potential Impact of Columbia-Class Program As discussed in the CRS report on the Columbia-class program,65 the Navy since 2013 has identified the Columbia-class program as its top program priority, meaning that it is the Navy’s intention to fully fund this program, if necessary at the expense of other Navy programs, including other Navy shipbuilding programs. This led to concerns that in a situation of finite Navy shipbuilding budgets, funding requirements for the Columbia-class program could crowd out funding for procuring other types of Navy ships. These concerns in turn led to the creation by Congress of the National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund (NSBDF), a fund in the DOD budget that is intended in part to encourage policymakers to identify funding for the Columbia-class program from sources across the entire DOD budget rather than from inside the Navy’s budget alone. Several years ago, when concerns arose about the potential impact of the Columbia-class program on funding available for other Navy shipbuilding programs, the Navy’s shipbuilding budget was roughly $14 billion per year, and the roughly $7 billion per year that the Columbia-class program is projected to require from the mid-2020s to the mid-2030s (see Figure 2) represented roughly one-half of that total. With the Navy’s shipbuilding budget having grown in more recent years to a total of roughly $24 billion per year, the $7 billion per year projected to be required by the Columbia-class program during those years does not loom proportionately as large as it once did in the Navy’s shipbuilding budget picture. Even so, some concerns remain regarding the potential impact of the Columbia-class program on funding available for other Navy shipbuilding programs. Potential for Cost Growth on Navy Ships If one or more Navy ship designs turn out to be more expensive to build than the Navy estimates, then the projected funding levels shown in Figure 2 would not be sufficient to procure all the ships shown in the 30-year shipbuilding plan. As detailed by CBO66 and GAO,67 lead ships in 63 Ben Werner, “Admiral: Navy Can Afford to Field a 310-Ship Fleet, Not 355,” USNI News, October 28, 2019. See also Rich Abott, “Navy Says Current Funding Only Supports 310 Ships,” Defense Daily, October 28, 2019; Paul McLeary, “Navy May Scrap Goal of 355 Ships; 310 Is Likely,” Breaking Defense, October 25, 2019. 64 See, for example, Marcus Weisgerber, “The US Navy Needs More Money, Its Top Admiral Bluntly Argues,” Defense One, January 14, 2020; Sam LaGrone, “CNO Gilday Calls for Budget Increase to Reach 355 Ship Fleet; New Battle Force Count Won’t Include Unmanned Ships,” USNI News, January 14, 2020; John M. Doyle, “CNO Wants Larger Slice of Defense Budget to Modernize, Meet China Threat,” Seapower, January 15, 2020; Rich Abott, “CNO: Ship Count Will Not Include Unmanned; Bigger Topline Needed For Fleet Goal,” Defense Daily, January 15, 2020. 65 CRS Report R41129, Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 66 See Congressional Budget Office, An Analysis of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2019 Shipbuilding Plan, October 2018, p. 25, including Figure 10. 67 See Government Accountability Office, Navy Shipbuilding[:] Past Performance Provides Valuable Lessons for Future Investments, GAO-18-238SP, June 2018, p. 8. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 35 Navy shipbuilding programs in many cases have turned out to be more expensive to build than the Navy had estimated. Ship designs that can be viewed as posing a risk of being more expensive to build than the Navy estimates include Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78) class aircraft carriers, Columbia-class ballistic missile submarines, Virginia-class attack submarines equipped with the Virginia Payload Module (VPM), Flight III versions of the DDG-51 destroyer, FFG(X) frigates, LPD-17 Flight II amphibious ships, and John Lewis (TAO-205) class oilers, as well as other new classes of ships that the Navy wants to begin procuring years from now. CBO Estimate As mentioned earlier, the statute that requires the Navy to submit a 30-year shipbuilding plan each year (10 U.S.C. 231) also requires CBO to submit its own independent analysis of the potential cost of the 30-year plan (10 U.S.C. 231[d]). Figure 3 shows, in a graphic form, CBO’s estimate of the annual amounts of funding that would be needed to implement the Navy’s FY2020 30-year shipbuilding plan. This figure can be compared to the Navy’s estimate of its FY2020 30-year plan as shown in Figure 2. FY2020 30-year plan, in part because there are a substantial number of these SSNs in the plan, and because those ships occur in the latter years of the plan, where the effects of the technical difference between CBO and the Navy regarding the treatment of inflation show more strongly. Figure 3. CBO Estimate of Funding Requirements for 30-Year Plan Constant FY2019 dollars, in billions Source: Congressional Budget Office, An Analysis of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2020 Shipbuilding Plan, October 2019, Figure 8 on page 16. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 36 CBO analyses of past Navy 30-year shipbuilding plans have generally estimated the cost of implementing those plans to be higher than what the Navy estimated. Consistent with that past pattern, as shown in Table 5, CBO’s estimate of the cost to implement the Navy’s FY2020 30-year shipbuilding plan is about 31% higher than the Navy’s estimated cost for the FY2020 plan. More specifically, as shown in the table, CBO estimated that the cost of the first 10 years of the FY2020 30-year plan would be about 2% higher than the Navy’s estimate; that the cost of the middle 10 years of the plan would be about 21% higher than the Navy’s estimate; and that the cost of the final 10 years of the plan would be about 41% higher than the Navy’s estimate.68 Table 5. Navy and CBO Estimates of Cost of 30-Year Shipbuilding Plan Funding for new-construction ships, in billions of constant FY2019 dollars First 10 years of the plan Middle 10 years of the plan Final 10 years of the plan Entire 30 years of the plan Navy estimate 20.3 24.4 21.8 22.0 CBO estimate 20.7 29.7 30.7 28.8 % difference between Navy and CBO estimates 2 21 41 31 Source: Congressional Budget Office, An Analysis of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2020 Shipbuilding Plan, October 2019, Table 4 on page 13. Notes: The figures shown for “% difference” are those presented in the CBO report, which are derived from dollar figures for the Navy and CBO estimates that were subsequently rounded off by CBO for presentation in its report. This is why the figure for “% difference” for the middle 10 years of the plan shows as 21% rather than 22%. Treatment of Inflation The growing divergence between CBO’s estimate and the Navy’s estimate as one moves from the first 10 years of the 30-year plan to the final 10 years of the plan is due in part to a technical difference between CBO and the Navy regarding the treatment of inflation. This difference compounds over time, making it increasingly important as a factor in the difference between CBO’s estimates and the Navy’s estimates the further one goes into the 30-year period. In other words, other things held equal, this factor tends to push the CBO and Navy estimates further apart as one proceeds from the earlier years of the plan to the later years of the plan.69 Designs of Future Classes of Ships The growing divergence between CBO’s estimate and the Navy’s estimate as one moves from the first 10 years of the 30-year plan to the final 10 years of the plan is also due to differences between CBO and the Navy about the costs of certain ship classes, particularly classes that are projected to be procured starting years from now. The designs of these future ship classes are not yet determined, creating more potential for CBO and the Navy to come to differing conclusions regarding their potential cost. 68 Congressional Budget Office, An Analysis of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2020 Shipbuilding Plan, October 2019, Table 4 on page 13. 69 For additional discussion of how CBO estimates the costs of new Navy ships, see Congressional Budget Office, How CBO Estimates the Cost of New Ships, April 2018, 6 pp. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 37 For the FY2020 30-year plan, the largest source of difference between CBO and the Navy regarding the costs of individual ship classes is a new class of SSNs that the Navy wants to begin procuring in FY2031 as the successor to the Virginia-class SSN design. This new class of SSNs, CBO says, accounts for 34% of the difference between the CBO and Navy estimates for the The second-largest source of difference between CBO and the Navy regarding the costs of individual ship classes is a new class of large surface combatant (i.e., cruiser or destroyer) that the Navy wants to begin procuring in FY2025, which accounts for 33% of the difference, for reasons that are similar to those mentioned above for the new class of SSNs. The third-largest source of difference is the new class of frigates (FFG[X]s) that the Navy wants to begin procuring in FY2020, which accounts for 10% of the difference. The remaining 23% of difference between the CBO and Navy estimates is accounted for collectively by several other shipbuilding programs, each of which individually accounts for between 1% and 4% of the difference. The Columbia-class program, which accounts for 4% of the difference, is one of the programs in this final group.70 Sustainment Cost In addition to the issue of the cost to build new ships, the Navy in its FY2020 30-year shipbuilding plan highlighted a concern over the potential costs to sustain a larger fleet. On this issue, the FY2020 30-year shipbuilding plan states in part Coincident with the relatively new dynamic of purchasing more ships to grow the force instead of simply replacing ships or shrinking the force, is the responsibility to “own” the additional inventory when it arrives. Consistent annual funding in the shipbuilding account is foundational for an efficient industrial base in support of steady growth and long-term maintenance planning, but equally important is the properly phased, additional funding needed for operations and sustainment accounts as each new ship is delivered—the much larger fiscal burden over the life of a ship and the essence of the challenge to remain balanced across the three integral elements of readiness–capability–capacity. Because the Navy [until recently] has been shrinking not growing, and because of the disconnected timespan from purchase to delivery, often five years or more and often beyond the FYDP, there is risk of underestimating the aggregate sustainment costs looming over the horizon that must now be carefully considered in fiscal forecasting. For a ship, the rough rule of thumb for cost is 30 percent for procurement and 70 percent for operating and sustainment; for example, a ship that costs $1B to buy costs $3.3B to own, amortized over its lifespan. Accordingly, multi-ship deliveries can add hundreds of millions of dollars to a budget year, and then require the same funding per year thereafter, compounded by additional deliveries in subsequent years and only offset by ship retirements, which lag deliveries when growing the force. A similar dynamic occurs when the life of a ship is extended. Sustainment resources programmed to shift from a retiring ship to a new ship must now stay in place – for the duration of the extension. The burden continues to grow until equilibrium is reached at the desired higher inventory, when deliveries match retirements and all resourcing accounts reach steady-state at a higher, enduring sustainment cost. For perspective, the current budget, among the largest ever, supports a modern fleet of approximately 300 ships, nearly 20 percent fewer than the goal of 355. The battle force 70 Congressional Budget Office, An Analysis of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2020 Shipbuilding Plan, October 2019, Table A-1 on page 29. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 38 inventory… rises from 301 ships in FY2020 to [a projected figure of] 314 ships in FY2024, and then 355 in FY2034. The programmed sustainment cost… is $24B [billion] in FY2020 and rises to $30B [billion in FY2024 in TY$ [then-year dollars]. When the battle force inventory reaches 355 in FY2034, [the] estimated cost to sustain that fleet will approach $40B (TY$), 32% higher than in FY2024. For now, included in this sustainment estimate are only personnel, planned maintenance, and some operations; representing those costs tied directly to owning and operating a ship, easily modeled today, and already line-item accounted for in the budget. Equally important additional costs, but not yet included in the future estimate, are those not easily associated with individual ships and require complex modeling for long-term forecasting (beyond 3 to 5 years), such as the balance of the operations accounts (market and schedule driven), modernization and ordnance (threat and technology driven), infrastructure and training (services spread across many ships), aviation detachments, networks and cyber support, plus others…. Less of a challenge when shrinking the force, the Navy is now working towards developing the complex model needed to capture indirect costs for growing the force. Until then, macro ratios are helpful in estimating rough orders of magnitude beyond the FYDP and for identifying future areas of concern. Similar to procurement, estimates will be less precise deeper into the plan. Recovering from the long-term investment imbalance has proven to be costly, particularly in the readiness accounts. As readiness becomes more accurately defined, the modeling will improve and so will the ability to more accurately forecast. However, no matter the method, the anticipated cost of sustaining the proper mix of 355 ships is anticipated to be substantial, and reform efforts and balanced scalability will continue to be the drivers going forward.71 A May 15, 2019, press report states: The service [the navy] is also getting some sobering feedback on how much it will cost to sustain a significantly larger fleet— something it hasn’t had to do in decades. As the Navy plans for more ships, Vice Adm. William Merz Deputy Chief Of Naval Operations For Warfare Systems said Wednesday, “we’re also coming to realize what that is going to cost, and how you’re going to sustain today’s fleet while continuing to grow.” The planning process is “much more challenging than anyone realized,” he said, “but we’re much smarter about our business” than just a few years ago…. … taking the fleet from under 300 ships to at least 355 is a daunting task, Merz said at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. “We don’t have the complex modeling to even understand what all of these costs are going to materialize to over the next 20 years,” he said, but the service is “working hard to converge on a model” to sustain the ships over the long haul.72 Legislative Activity for FY2021 CRS Reports Tracking Legislation on Specific Navy Shipbuilding Programs Detailed coverage of legislative activity on certain Navy shipbuilding programs (including funding levels, legislative provisions, and report language) can be found in the following CRS reports: 71 U.S. Navy, Report to Congress on the Annual Long-Range Plan for Construction of Naval Vessels for Fiscal Year 2020, pp. 19-20. 72 Paul McLeary, “Navy Wary of Growing Costs While It Ramps Up Ops,” Breaking Defense, May 15, 2019. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 39  CRS Report R41129, Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.  CRS Report RL32418, Navy Virginia (SSN-774) Class Attack Submarine Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.  CRS Report RS20643, Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. (This report also covers the issue of the Administration’s FY2020 budget proposal, which the Administration withdrew on April 30, to not fund a mid-life refueling overhaul [called a refueling complex overhaul, or RCOH] for the aircraft carrier Harry S. Truman [CVN-75], and to retire CVN-75 around FY2024.)  CRS Report RL32109, Navy DDG-51 and DDG-1000 Destroyer Programs: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.  CRS Report R44972, Navy Frigate (FFG[X]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.  CRS Report R43543, Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.  CRS Report R43546, Navy John Lewis (TAO-205) Class Oiler Shipbuilding Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.  CRS Report R45757, Navy Large Unmanned Surface and Undersea Vehicles: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Legislative activity on individual Navy shipbuilding programs that are not covered in detail in the above reports is covered below. Summary of Congressional Action on FY2021 Funding Request The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget requests funding for the procurement of 7 new ships:  1 Columbia-class ballistic missile submarine;  1 Virginia-class attack submarine;  2 DDG-51 class Aegis destroyers;  1 FFG(X) frigate;  2 TATS towing, salvage, and rescue ships. As discussed earlier, the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission presents LPD-31, an LPD-17 Flight II amphibious ship, as a ship requested for procurement in FY2021. Consistent with congressional action on the Navy’s FY2020 budget regarding the procurement of LPD-31, this CRS report treats LPD-31 as a ship that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and provided procurement funding for) in FY2020. The Navy’s proposed FY2021 shipbuilding budget also requests funding for ships that have been procured in prior fiscal years, and ships that are to be procured in future fiscal years, as well as funding for activities other than the building of new Navy ships. Table 6 summarizes congressional action on the Navy’s FY2021 funding request for Navy shipbuilding. The table shows the amounts requested and congressional changes to those requested amounts. A blank cell in a filled-in column showing congressional changes to requested amounts indicates no change from the requested amount. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 40 Table 6. Summary of Congressional Action on FY2021 Funding Request Millions of dollars, rounded to nearest tenth; totals may not add due to rounding Line number Program Request Congressional changes to requested amounts Authorization Appropriation HASC SASC Conf. HAC SAC Conf. Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) appropriation account 001 Columbia-class SSBN 2,891.5 002 Columbia-class SSBN (AP) 1,123.2 003 CVN 78-80 aircraft carriers 997.5 004 CVN-81 aircraft carrier 1,645.6 005 Virginia-class SSN 2,334.7 006 Virginia-class SSN (AP) 1,901.2 007 CVN RCOH 1,878.5 008 CVN RCOH (AP) 17.4 009 DDG-1000 78.2 010 DDG-51 3,040.3 011 DDG-51 (AP) 29.3 012 LCS 0 013 FFG(X) 1,053.1 014 LPD-17 Flight II 1,155.8 015 LPD-17 Flight II (AP) 0 016 Expeditionary Sea Base (ESB) 0 017 LHA amphibious assault ship 0 018 LHA amphibious assault ship (AP) 0 019 Expeditionary Fast Transport (EPF) 0 020 TAO-205 oiler 0 021 TAO-205 oiler (AP) 0 022 TATS 168.2 023 LCU 1700 landing craft 87.4 024 Outfitting and post delivery 825.6 025 Ship-to-shore connector (SSC) 0 026 Service craft 249.8 027 LCAC landing craft SLEP 56.5 028 Completion of PY ships 369.1 TOTAL 19,902.8 Source: Table prepared by CRS based on Navy FY2021 budget submission, committee reports, and explanatory statements on the FY2021 National Defense Authorization Act and FY2020 DOD Appropriations Act. Notes: Millions of dollars, rounded to nearest tenth. A blank cell indicates no change to requested amount. Totals may not add due to rounding. AP is advance procurement funding; HASC is House Armed Services Committee; SASC is Senate Armed Services Committee; HAC is House Appropriations Committee; SAC is Senate Appropriations Committee; Conf. is conference report. SHIPS Implementation Act (S. 3258) On February 5, 2020, Senator Wicker introduced the Securing the Homeland by Increasing our Power on the Seas (SHIPS) Implementation Act. The text of the bill states: Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 41 A BILL To foster the implementation of the policy of the United States to achieve 355 battle force ships as soon as practicable. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, SECTION 1. Short title. This Act may be cited as the “Securing the Homeland by Increasing our Power on the Seas Implementation Act” or “SHIPS Implementation Act”. SEC. 2. Findings. Congress makes the following findings: (1) The 2016 Navy Force Structure Assessment (FSA) started with a request to the combatant commanders to provide their unconstrained desire for Navy forces in their respective theaters consistent with meeting the demands of the Defense Planning Scenarios. To fully resource these platform-specific demands with very little risk in any theater while supporting enduring missions, ongoing two operations and setting the theater for prompt warfighting response, the Navy would require a 653-ship force. (2) The 2016 Navy FSA further determined that a 355-ship battle force is the level that balances an acceptable level of warfighting risk to Navy equipment and personnel against available resources and achieves a force size that can reasonably achieve success. (3) On March 27, 2019, before the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate, Vice Admiral William Merz testified, “I certainly do not expect the [355-ship requirement] to go any lower. I would not be surprised if it goes up in several categories.”. (4) The Navy battle force currently consists of 293 ships. (5) The Navy projects having 313 battle force ships in 2025. (6) The Navy assesses the size of the People’s Liberation Army Navy as having surpassed that of the United States Navy and predicts that it will reach 400 ships in 2025. (7) Section 1025 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (Public Law 115–91; 10 U.S.C. 7921 note) established the policy of the United States to have available, as soon as practicable, not fewer than 355 battle force ships, with funding subject to the availability of appropriations or other funds. (8) The Department of Defense has been able to achieve program efficiencies and cost savings by using multiyear and block buy contracting with many weapons programs. These contracting strategies are currently being utilized to procure Ford-class aircraft carriers, Arleigh Burke-class destroyers, Virginia-class submarines, and John Lewis-class fleet oilers. SEC. 3. Sense of Congress on implementation of the Securing the Homeland by Increasing our Power on the Seas Implementation Act. It is the sense of Congress that to achieve the national policy of the United States to have available, as soon as practicable, not fewer than 355 battle force ships— (1) the Navy must be adequately resourced to increase the size of the Navy in accordance with the national policy, which includes the associated ships, aircraft, personnel, sustainment, and munitions; (2) across fiscal years 2021 through 2025, the Navy should start construction on not fewer than— (A) 12 Arleigh Burke-class destroyers; Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 42 (B) 10 Virginia-class submarines; (C) 2 Columbia-class submarines; (D) 3 San Antonio-class amphibious ships; (E) 1 LHA-class amphibious ship; (F) 6 John Lewis-class fleet oilers; and (G) 5 guided missile frigates; (3) new guided missile frigate construction should increase to a rate of between two and four ships per year once design maturity and construction readiness permit; (4) the Columbia-class submarine program should be funded using the National Sea Based Deterrence Fund with funds that are in addition to the Navy budget in recognition of the critical single national mission that these vessels will perform; (5) stable shipbuilding rates of construction should be maintained for each vessel class, utilizing multi-year or block buy contract authorities when appropriate, until a deliberate transition plan is identified; and (6) prototyping of potential new shipboard subsystems should be accelerated to build knowledge systematically, and, to the maximum extent practicable, shipbuilding prototyping should occur at the subsystem-level in advance of ship design. SEC. 4. Procurement authorities for certain shipbuilding programs. (a) Contract authority.— (1) PROCUREMENT AUTHORIZED.—In fiscal year 2021, the Secretary of the Navy may enter into one or more contracts for the procurement of any or all of the following groups of vessels: (A) Three San Antonio-class amphibious ships and one America-class amphibious ship. (B) Two Columbia-class submarines. (C) Six John Lewis-class fleet oilers. (2) PROCUREMENT IN CONJUNCTION WITH EXISTING CONTRACTS.—The ships authorized to be procured under paragraph (1) may be procured as additions to existing contracts covering such programs. (b) Certification required.—A contract may not be entered into under subsection (a) unless the Secretary of the Navy certifies to the congressional defense committees, in writing, not later than 30 days before entry into the contract, each of the following, which shall be prepared by the milestone decision authority for such programs: (1) The use of such a contract will result in significant savings compared to the total anticipated costs of carrying out the program through annual contracts. In certifying cost savings under the preceding sentence, the Secretary shall include a written explanation of— (A) the estimated end cost and appropriated funds by fiscal year, by hull, without the authority provided in subsection (a); (B) the estimated end cost and appropriated funds by fiscal year, by hull, with the authority provided in subsection (a); (C) the estimated cost savings or increase by fiscal year, by hull, with the authority provided in subsection (a); (D) the discrete actions that will accomplish such cost savings or avoidance; and Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 43 (E) the contractual actions that will ensure the estimated cost savings are realized. (2) There is a reasonable expectation that throughout the contemplated contract period the Secretary of the Navy will request funding for the contract at the level required to avoid contract cancellation. (3) There is a stable design for the property to be acquired and the technical risks associated with such property are not excessive. (4) The estimates of both the cost of the contract and the anticipated cost avoidance through the use of a contract authorized under subsection (a) are realistic. (5) The use of such a contract will promote the national security of the United States. (6) During the fiscal year in which such contract is to be awarded, sufficient funds will be available to perform the contract in such fiscal year, and the future-years defense program (as defined under section 221 of title 10, United States Code) for such fiscal year will include the funding required to execute the program without cancellation. (c) Use of incremental funding.—With respect to a contract or contracts entered into pursuant to subsection (a)(1)(B), the Secretary of the Navy may use incremental funding to make payments under the contract with funds appropriated to the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy or National Sea Based Deterrence Fund accounts through fiscal year 2025. (d) Authority for advance procurement.—The Secretary of the Navy may enter into one or more contracts for advance procurement associated with a vessel or vessels for which authorization to enter into a multiyear procurement contract is provided under subsection (a), and for systems and subsystems associated with such vessels in economic order quantities when cost savings are achievable. (e) Condition for out-Year contract payments.—A contract entered into under subsection (a) shall provide that any obligation of the United States to make a payment under the contract for a fiscal year is subject to the availability of appropriations for that purpose for such fiscal year. (f) Definitions.—In this section: (1) CONGRESSIONAL DEFENSE COMMITTEES.—The term “congressional defense committees” has the meaning given the term in section 101(a)(16) of title 10, United States Code. (2) MILESTONE DECISION AUTHORITY.—The term “milestone decision authority” has the meaning given the term in section 2366a(d) of title 10, United States Code. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 44 Appendix A. Strategic and Budgetary Context This appendix presents some brief comments on elements of the strategic and budgetary context in which U.S. Navy force structure and shipbuilding plans may be considered. Shift in International Security Environment World events in recent years have led observers, particularly since late 2013, to conclude that the international security environment in recent years has undergone a shift from the post-Cold War era that began in the late 1980s and early 1990s, also sometimes known as the unipolar moment (with the United States as the unipolar power), to a new and different situation that features, among other things, renewed great power competition with China and Russia and challenges by these two countries and others to elements of the U.S.-led international order that has operated since World War II. This situation, which has multiple potential implications for U.S. defense plans and programs, is discussed further in another CRS report.73 World Geography, U.S. Grand Strategy, and U.S. Naval Forces74 From a U.S. perspective on grand strategy and geopolitics,75 it can be noted that most of the world’s people, resources, and economic activity are located not in the Western Hemisphere, but in the other hemisphere, particularly Eurasia. In response to this basic feature of world geography, U.S. policymakers for the past several decades have chosen to pursue, as a key element of U.S. national strategy, a goal of preventing the emergence of a regional hegemon in one part of Eurasia or another, on the grounds that such a hegemon could represent a concentration of power strong enough to threaten vital U.S. interests by, for example, denying the United States access to some of the other hemisphere’s resources and economic activity. Although U.S. policymakers have not often stated this key national strategic goal explicitly in public, U.S. military (and diplomatic) operations in recent decades—both wartime operations and day-to-day operations—can be viewed as having been carried out in no small part in support of this key goal. The traditional U.S. goal of preventing the emergence of a regional hegemon in one part of Eurasia or another has been a major reason why the U.S. military is structured with force elements that enable it to cross broad expanses of ocean and air space and then conduct sustained, 73 CRS Report R43838, Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 74 For a stand-alone CRS product covering much of the same material presented in this section, see CRS In Focus IF10485, Defense Primer: Geography, Strategy, and U.S. Force Design, by Ronald O'Rourke. 75 The term grand strategy generally refers in foreign policy discussions to a country’s overall approach for securing its interests and making its way in the world, using all the national instruments at its disposal, including diplomatic, informational, military, and economic tools (sometimes abbreviated in U.S. government parlance as DIME). A country’s role in the world can be viewed as a visible expression of its grand strategy. For the United States, grand strategy can be viewed as a design or blueprint at a global or interregional level, as opposed to U.S. approaches for individual regions, countries, or issues. The term geopolitics is often used as a synonym for international politics or for strategy relating to international politics. More specifically, it refers to the influence of basic geographic features on international relations, and to the analysis of international relations from a perspective that places a strong emphasis on the influence of such geographic features. Basic geographic features involved in geopolitical analysis include things such as the relative sizes and locations of countries or land masses; the locations of key resources such as oil or water; geographic barriers such as oceans, deserts, and mountain ranges; and key transportation links such as roads, railways, and waterways. For additional discussion, see CRS Report R44891, U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke and Michael Moodie. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 45 large-scale military operations upon arrival. Force elements associated with this goal include, among other things, an Air Force with significant numbers of long-range bombers, long-range surveillance aircraft, long-range airlift aircraft, and aerial refueling tankers, and a Navy with significant numbers of aircraft carriers, nuclear-powered attack submarines, large surface combatants, large amphibious ships, and underway replenishment ships. The United States is the only country in the world that has designed its military to cross broad expanses of ocean and air space and then conduct sustained, large-scale military operations upon arrival. The other countries in the Western Hemisphere do not design their forces to do this because they cannot afford to, and because the United States has been, in effect, doing it for them. Countries in the other hemisphere do not design their forces to do this for the very basic reason that they are already in the other hemisphere, and consequently instead spend their defense money on forces that are tailored largely for influencing events in their own local region. The fact that the United States has designed its military to do something that other countries do not design their forces to do—cross broad expanses of ocean and air space and then conduct sustained, large-scale military operations upon arrival—can be important to keep in mind when comparing the U.S. military to the militaries of other nations. For example, in observing that the U.S. Navy has 11 aircraft carriers while other countries have no more than one or two, it can be noted other countries do not need a significant number of aircraft carriers because, unlike the United States, they are not designing their forces to cross broad expanses of ocean and air space and then conduct sustained, large-scale military operations upon arrival. As another example, it is sometimes noted, in assessing the adequacy of U.S. naval forces, that U.S. naval forces are equal in tonnage to the next dozen or more navies combined, and that most of those next dozen or more navies are the navies of U.S. allies. Those other fleets, however, are mostly of Eurasian countries, which do not design their forces to cross to the other side of the world and then conduct sustained, large-scale military operations upon arrival. The fact that the U.S. Navy is much bigger than allied navies does not necessarily prove that U.S. naval forces are either sufficient or excessive; it simply reflects the differing and generally more limited needs that U.S. allies have for naval forces. (It might also reflect an underinvestment by some of those allies to meet even their more limited naval needs.) Countries have differing needs for naval and other military forces. The United States, as a country located in the Western Hemisphere that has adopted a goal of preventing the emergence of a regional hegemon in one part of Eurasia or another, has defined a need for naval and other military forces that is quite different from the needs of allies that are located in Eurasia. The sufficiency of U.S. naval and other military forces consequently is best assessed not through comparison to the militaries of other countries, but against U.S. strategic goals. More generally, from a geopolitical perspective, it can be noted that that U.S. naval forces, while not inexpensive, give the United States the ability to convert the world’s oceans—a global commons that covers more than two-thirds of the planet’s surface—into a medium of maneuver and operations for projecting U.S. power ashore and otherwise defending U.S. interests around the world. The ability to use the world’s oceans in this manner—and to deny other countries the use of the world’s oceans for taking actions against U.S. interests—constitutes an immense asymmetric advantage for the United States. This point would be less important if less of the world were covered by water, or if the oceans were carved into territorial blocks, like the land. Most of the world, however, is covered by water, and most of those waters are international waters, where naval forces can operate freely. The point, consequently, is not that U.S. naval forces are intrinsically special or privileged—it is that they have a certain value simply as a consequence of the physical and legal organization of the planet. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 46 Potential Change in U.S. Role in the World The U.S. role in the world refers to the overall character, purpose, or direction of U.S. participation in international affairs and the country’s overall relationship to the rest of the world. The U.S. role in the world can be viewed as establishing the overall context or framework for U.S. policymakers for developing, implementing, and measuring the success of U.S. policies and actions on specific international issues, and for foreign countries or other observers for interpreting and understanding U.S. actions on the world stage. While descriptions of the U.S. role in the world since the end of World War II vary in their specifics, it can be described in general terms as consisting of four key elements: global leadership; defense and promotion of the liberal international order; defense and promotion of freedom, democracy, and human rights; and prevention of the emergence of regional hegemons in Eurasia. A change in the U.S. role could have significant and even profound effects on U.S. security, freedom, and prosperity. It could lead to a change in U.S. grand strategy (see previous section), which in turn could lead to significant changes to U.S. defense plans and programs, including plans and programs relating to the Navy. Some observers, particularly critics of the Trump Administration, argue that under the Trump Administration, the United States is substantially changing the U.S. role in the world. Other observers, particularly supporters of the Trump Administration, while acknowledging that the Trump Administration has changed U.S. foreign policy in a number of areas compared to policies pursued by the Obama Administration, argue that under the Trump Administration, there has been less change and more continuity regarding the U.S. role in the world. The situation is discussed further in another CRS report.76 Declining U.S. Technological and Qualitative Edge DOD officials have expressed concern that the technological and qualitative edge that U.S. military forces have had relative to the military forces of other countries is being narrowed by improving military capabilities in other countries. China’s improving military capabilities are a primary contributor to that concern.77 Russia’s rejuvenated military capabilities are an additional contributor. DOD in recent years has taken a number of actions to arrest and reverse the decline in the U.S. technological and qualitative edge.78 China’s Naval Modernization Effort Observers of Chinese and U.S. military forces view China’s improving naval capabilities as posing a potential challenge in the Western Pacific to the U.S. Navy’s ability to achieve and maintain control of blue-water ocean areas in wartime—the first such challenge the U.S. Navy has faced since the end of the Cold War.79 More broadly, these observers view China’s naval 76 See CRS Report R44891, U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke and Michael Moodie. 77 For more on China’s naval modernization effort, see CRS Report RL33153, China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities—Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 78 For additional discussion, see CRS Report R43838, Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 79 The term “blue-water ocean areas” is used here to mean waters that are away from shore, as opposed to near-shore Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 47 capabilities as a key element of an emerging broader Chinese military challenge to the long-standing status of the United States as the leading military power in the Western Pacific. Constraints on Defense Spending Constraints on defense spending, combined with some of the considerations above, have led to discussions among observers about how to balance competing demands for finite U.S. defense funds, and about whether programs for responding to China’s military modernization effort can be adequately funded while also adequately funding other defense-spending priorities, such as initiatives for responding to Russia’s actions in Ukraine and elsewhere in Europe and U.S. operations for countering challenges to U.S. interests in the Middle East. (i.e., littoral) waters. Iran is viewed as posing a challenge to the U.S. Navy’s ability to quickly achieve and maintain sea control in littoral waters in and near the Strait of Hormuz. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 48 Appendix B. Earlier Navy Force-Structure Goals Dating Back to 2001 The table below shows earlier Navy force-structure goals dating back to 2001. The 308-ship force-level goal of March 2015, shown in the first column of the table, is the goal that was replaced by the 355-ship force-level goal released in December 2016. Table B-1. Earlier Navy Force-Structure Goals Dating Back to 2001 Ship type 308-ship goal of March 2015 306-ship goal of January 2013 ~310-316 ship goal of March 2012 Revised 313-ship goal of Septem-ber 2011 Changes to February 2006 313-ship goal announced through mid-2011 February 2006 Navy goal for 313-ship fleet Early-2005 Navy goal for fleet of 260-325 ships 2002-2004 Navy goal for 375-ship Navya 2001 QDR goal for 310-ship Navy 260-ships 325-ships Ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs) 12b 12b 12-14b 12b 12b 14 14 14 14 14 Cruise missile submarines (SSGNs) 0c 0c 0-4c 4c 0c 4 4 4 4 2 or 4d Attack submarines (SSNs) 48 48 ~48 48 48 48 37 41 55 55 Aircraft carriers 11e 11e 11e 11e 11e 11f 10 11 12 12 Cruisers and destroyers 88 88 ~90 94 94g 88 67 92 104 116 Frigates 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Littoral Combat Ships (LCSs) 52 52 ~55 55 55 55 63 82 56 0 Amphibious ships 34 33 ~32 33 33h 31 17 24 37 36 MPF(F) shipsi 0j 0j 0j 0j 0j 12i 14i 20i 0i 0i Combat logistics (resupply) ships 29 29 ~29 30 30 30 24 26 42 34 Dedicated mine warfare ships 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 26k 16 Joint High Speed Vessels (JHSVs) 10l 10l 10l 10l 21l 3 0 0 0 0 Otherm 24 23 ~23 16 24n 17 10 11 25 25 Total battle force ships 308 306 ~310-316 313 328 313 260 325 375 310 or 312 Sources: Table prepared by CRS based on U.S. Navy data. Notes: QDR is Quadrennial Defense Review. The “~” symbol means approximately. a. Initial composition. Composition was subsequently modified. b. The Navy plans to replace the 14 current Ohio-class SSBNs with a new class of 12 next-generation SSBNs. For further discussion, see CRS Report R41129, Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. c. Although the Navy plans to continue operating its four SSGNs until they reach retirement age in the late 2020s, the Navy does not plan to replace these ships when they retire. This situation can be expressed in a table like this one with either a 4 or a 0. d. The report on the 2001 QDR did not mention a specific figure for SSGNs. The Administration’s proposed FY2001 DOD budget requested funding to support the conversion of two available Trident SSBNs into SSGNs, and the retirement of two other Trident SSBNs. Congress, in marking up this request, supported a plan to convert all four available SSBNs into SSGNs. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 49 e. With congressional approval, the goal has been temporarily be reduced to 10 carriers for the period between the retirement of the carrier Enterprise (CVN-65) in December 2012 and entry into service of the carrier Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78), currently scheduled for September 2015. f. For a time, the Navy characterized the goal as 11 carriers in the nearer term, and eventually 12 carriers. g. The 94-ship goal was announced by the Navy in an April 2011 report to Congress on naval force structure and missile defense. h. The Navy acknowledged that meeting a requirement for being able to lift the assault echelons of 2.0 Marine Expeditionary Brigades (MEBs) would require a minimum of 33 amphibious ships rather than the 31 ships shown in the February 2006 plan. For further discussion, see CRS Report RL34476, Navy LPD-17 Amphibious Ship Procurement: Background, Issues, and Options for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. i. Today’s Maritime Prepositioning Force (MPF) ships are intended primarily to support Marine Corps operations ashore, rather than Navy combat operations, and thus are not counted as Navy battle force ships. The planned MPF (Future) ships, however, would have contributed to Navy combat capabilities (for example, by supporting Navy aircraft operations). For this reason, the ships in the planned MPF(F) squadron were counted by the Navy as battle force ships. The planned MPF(F) squadron was subsequently restructured into a different set of initiatives for enhancing the existing MPF squadrons; the Navy no longer plans to acquire an MPF(F) squadron. j. The Navy no longer plans to acquire an MPF(F) squadron. The Navy, however, has procured or plans to procure some of the ships that were previously planned for the squadron—specifically, TAKE-1 class cargo ships, and Mobile Landing Platform (MLP)/Afloat Forward Staging Base (AFSB) ships. These ships are included in the total shown for “Other” ships. AFSBs are now called Expeditionary Sea Base ships (ESBs). k. The figure of 26 dedicated mine warfare ships included 10 ships maintained in a reduced mobilization status called Mobilization Category B. Ships in this status are not readily deployable and thus do not count as battle force ships. The 375-ship proposal thus implied transferring these 10 ships to a higher readiness status. l. Totals shown include 5 ships transferred from the Army to the Navy and operated by the Navy primarily for the performance of Army missions. m. This category includes, among other things, command ships and support ships. n. The increase in this category from 17 ships under the February 2006 313-ship goal to 24 ships under the apparent 328-ship goal included the addition of one TAGOS ocean surveillance ship and the transfer into this category of six ships—three modified TAKE-1 class cargo ships, and three Mobile Landing Platform (MLP) ships—that were previously intended for the planned (but now canceled) MPF(F) squadron. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 50 Appendix C. Comparing Past Ship Force Levels to Current or Potential Future Levels In assessing the appropriateness of the current or potential future number of ships in the Navy, observers sometimes compare that number to historical figures for total Navy fleet size. Historical figures for total fleet size, however, can be a problematic yardstick for assessing the appropriateness of the current or potential future number of ships in the Navy, particularly if the historical figures are more than a few years old, because  the missions to be performed by the Navy, the mix of ships that make up the Navy, and the technologies that are available to Navy ships for performing missions all change over time; and  the number of ships in the fleet in an earlier year might itself have been inappropriate (i.e., not enough or more than enough) for meeting the Navy’s mission requirements in that year. Regarding the first bullet point above, the Navy, for example, reached a late-Cold War peak of 568 battle force ships at the end of FY1987,80 and as of April 29, 2020, included a total of 299 battle force ships. The FY1987 fleet, however, was intended to meet a set of mission requirements that focused on countering Soviet naval forces at sea during a potential multitheater NATO-Warsaw Pact conflict, while the April 2020 fleet is intended to meet a considerably different set of mission requirements centered on countering China’s improving naval capabilities. In addition, the Navy of FY1987 differed substantially from the April 2020 fleet in areas such as profusion of precision-guided air-delivered weapons, numbers of Tomahawk-capable ships, and the sophistication of C4ISR systems and networking capabilities.81 In coming years, Navy missions may shift again, and the capabilities of Navy ships will likely have changed further by that time due to developments such as more comprehensive implementation of networking technology, increased use of ship-based unmanned vehicles, and the potential fielding of new types of weapons such as lasers or electromagnetic rail guns. The 568-ship fleet of FY1987 may or may not have been capable of performing its stated missions; the 299-ship fleet of April 2020 may or may not be capable of performing its stated missions; and a fleet years from now with a certain number of ships may or may not be capable of performing its stated missions. Given changes over time in mission requirements, ship mixes, and technologies, however, these three issues are to a substantial degree independent of one another. For similar reasons, trends over time in the total number of ships in the Navy are not necessarily a reliable indicator of the direction of change in the fleet’s ability to perform its stated missions. An increasing number of ships in the fleet might not necessarily mean that the fleet’s ability to 80 Some publications have stated that the Navy reached a peak of 594 ships at the end of FY1987. This figure, however, is the total number of active ships in the fleet, which is not the same as the total number of battle force ships. The battle force ships figure is the number used in government discussions of the size of the Navy. In recent years, the total number of active ships has been larger than the total number of battle force ships. For example, the Naval History and Heritage Command (formerly the Naval Historical Center) states that as of November 16, 2001, the Navy included a total of 337 active ships, while the Navy states that as of November 19, 2001, the Navy included a total of 317 battle force ships. Comparing the total number of active ships in one year to the total number of battle force ships in another year is thus an apples-to-oranges comparison that in this case overstates the decline since FY1987 in the number of ships in the Navy. As a general rule to avoid potential statistical distortions, comparisons of the number of ships in the Navy over time should use, whenever possible, a single counting method. 81 C4ISR stands for command and control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 51 perform its stated missions is increasing, because the fleet’s mission requirements might be increasing more rapidly than ship numbers and average ship capability. Similarly, a decreasing number of ships in the fleet might not necessarily mean that the fleet’s ability to perform stated missions is decreasing, because the fleet’s mission requirements might be declining more rapidly than numbers of ships, or because average ship capability and the percentage of time that ships are in deployed locations might be increasing quickly enough to more than offset reductions in total ship numbers. Regarding the second of the two bullet points above, it can be noted that comparisons of the size of the fleet today with the size of the fleet in earlier years rarely appear to consider whether the fleet was appropriately sized in those earlier years (and therefore potentially suitable as a yardstick of comparison), even though it is quite possible that the fleet in those earlier years might not have been appropriately sized, and even though there might have been differences of opinion among observers at that time regarding that question. Just as it might not be prudent for observers years from now to tacitly assume that the 290-ship Navy of September 2019 was appropriately sized for meeting the mission requirements of 2019, even though there were differences of opinion among observers on that question, simply because a figure of 290 ships appears in the historical records for 2019, so, too, might it not be prudent for observers today to tacitly assume that the number of ships of the Navy in an earlier year was appropriate for meeting the Navy’s mission requirements that year, even though there might have been differences of opinion among observers at that time regarding that question, simply because the size of the Navy in that year appears in a table like Table H-1. Previous Navy force structure plans, such as those shown in Table B-1, might provide some insight into the potential adequacy of a proposed new force-structure plan, but changes over time in mission requirements, technologies available to ships for performing missions, and other force-planning factors, as well as the possibility that earlier force-structure plans might not have been appropriate for meeting the mission demands of their times, suggest that some caution should be applied in using past force structure plans for this purpose, particularly if those past force structure plans are more than a few years old. The Reagan-era goal for a 600-ship Navy, for example, was designed for a Cold War set of missions focusing on countering Soviet naval forces at sea, which is not an appropriate basis for planning the Navy today, and there was considerable debate during those years as to the appropriateness of the 600-ship goal.82 82 Navy force structure plans that predate those shown in Table B-1 include the Reagan-era 600-ship goal of the 1980s, the Base Force fleet of more than 400 ships planned during the final two years of the George H. W. Bush Administration, the 346-ship fleet from the Clinton Administration’s 1993 Bottom-Up Review (or BUR, sometimes also called Base Force II), and the 310-ship fleet of the Clinton Administration’s 1997 QDR. The table below summarizes some key features of these plans. Features of Recent Navy Force Structure Plans Plan 600-ship Base Force 1993 BUR 1997 QDR Total ships ~600 ~450/416a 346 ~305/310b Attack submarines 100 80/~55c 45-55 50/55d Aircraft carriers 15e 12 11+1f 11+1f Surface combatants 242/228g ~150 ~124 116 Amphibious ships ~75h 51i 41i 36i Source: Prepared by CRS based on DOD and U.S. Navy data. a. Commonly referred to as 450-ship goal, but called for decreasing to 416 ships by end of FY1999. b. Original total of about 305 ships was increased to about 310 due to increase in number of attack submarines to 55 Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 52 from 50. c. Plan originally included 80 attack submarines, but this was later reduced to about 55. d. Plan originally included 50 attack submarines but this was later increased to 55. e. Plus one additional aircraft carrier in the service life extension program (SLEP). f. Eleven active carriers plus one operational reserve carrier. g. Plan originally included 242 surface combatants but this was later reduced to 228. h. Number needed to lift assault echelons of one Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF) plus one Marine Expeditionary Brigade (MEB). i. Number needed to lift assault echelons of 2.5 MEBs. Changing numbers needed to meet this goal reflect in part changes in the design and capabilities of amphibious ships. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 53 Appendix D. Industrial Base and Employment Aspects of Additional Shipbuilding Work This appendix presents background information on the ability of the industrial base to take on the additional shipbuilding work associated with achieving and maintaining the Navy’s 355-ship force-level goal and on the employment impact of additional shipbuilding work. Industrial Base Ability The U.S. shipbuilding industrial base has some unused capacity to take on increased Navy shipbuilding work, particularly for certain kinds of surface ships, and its capacity could be increased further over time to support higher Navy shipbuilding rates. Navy shipbuilding rates could not be increased steeply across the board overnight—time (and investment) would be needed to hire and train additional workers and increase production facilities at shipyards and supplier firms, particularly for supporting higher rates of submarine production. Depending on their specialties, newly hired workers could be initially less productive per unit of time worked than more experienced workers. Some parts of the shipbuilding industrial base, such as the submarine construction industrial base, could face more challenges than others in ramping up to the higher production rates required to build the various parts of the 355-ship fleet. Over a period of a few to several years, with investment and management attention, Navy shipbuilding could ramp up to higher rates for achieving a 355-ship fleet over a period of 20-30 years. An April 2017 CBO report stated that all seven shipyards [currently involved in building the Navy’s major ships] would need to increase their workforces and several would need to make improvements to their infrastructure in order to build ships at a faster rate. However, certain sectors face greater obstacles in constructing ships at faster rates than others: Building more submarines to meet the goals of the 2016 force structure assessment would pose the greatest challenge to the shipbuilding industry. Increasing the number of aircraft carriers and surface combatants would pose a small to moderate challenge to builders of those vessels. Finally, building more amphibious ships and combat logistics and support ships would be the least problematic for the shipyards. The workforces across those yards would need to increase by about 40 percent over the next 5 to 10 years. Managing the growth and training of those new workforces while maintaining the current standard of quality and efficiency would represent the most significant industrywide challenge. In addition, industry and Navy sources indicate that as much as $4 billion would need to be invested in the physical infrastructure of the shipyards to achieve the higher production rates required under the [notional] 15-year and 20-year [buildup scenarios examined by CBO]. Less investment would be needed for the [notional] 25-year or 30-year [buildup scenarios examined by CBO].83 A January 13, 2017, press report states the following: The Navy’s production lines are hot and the work to prepare them for the possibility of building out a much larger fleet would be manageable, the service’s head of acquisition said Thursday. From a logistics perspective, building the fleet from its current 274 ships to 355, as recommended in the Navy’s newest force structure assessment in December, would be 83 Congressional Budget Office, Costs of Building a 355-Ship Navy, April 2017, pp. 9-10. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 54 straightforward, Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development and Acquisition Sean Stackley told reporters at the Surface Navy Association’s annual symposium. “By virtue of maintaining these hot production lines, frankly, over the last eight years, our facilities are in pretty good shape,” Stackley said. “In fact, if you talked to industry, they would say we’re underutilizing the facilities that we have.” The areas where the Navy would likely have to adjust “tooling” to answer demand for a larger fleet would likely be in Virginia-class attack submarines and large surface combatants, the DDG-51 guided missile destroyers—two ship classes likely to surge if the Navy gets funding to build to 355 ships, he said. “Industry’s going to have to go out and procure special tooling associated with going from current production rates to a higher rate, but I would say that’s easily done,” he said. Another key, Stackley said, is maintaining skilled workers—both the builders in the yards and the critical supply-chain vendors who provide major equipment needed for ship construction. And, he suggested, it would help to avoid budget cuts and other events that would force workforce layoffs. “We’re already prepared to ramp up,” he said. “In certain cases, that means not laying off the skilled workforce we want to retain.”84 A January 17, 2017, press report states the following: Building stable designs with active production lines is central to the Navy’s plan to grow to 355 ships. “if you look at the 355-ship number, and you study the ship classes (desired), the big surge is in attack submarines and large surface combatants, which today are DDG-51 (destroyers),” the Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Sean Stackley, told reporters at last week’s Surface Navy Association conference. Those programs have proven themselves reliable performers both at sea and in the shipyards. From today’s fleet of 274 ships, “we’re on an irreversible path to 308 by 2021. Those ships are already in construction,” said Stackley. “To go from there to 355, virtually all those ships are currently in production, with some exceptions: Ohio Replacement, (we) just got done the Milestone B there (to move from R&D into detailed design); and then upgrades to existing platforms. So we have hot production lines that will take us to that 355-ship Navy.”85 A January 24, 2017, press report states the following: Navy officials say a recently determined plan to increase its fleet size by adding more new submarines, carriers and destroyers is “executable” and that early conceptual work toward this end is already underway.... Although various benchmarks will need to be reached in order for this new plan to come to fruition, such as Congressional budget allocations, Navy officials do tell Scout Warrior that the service is already working—at least in concept—on plans to vastly enlarge the fleet. Findings from this study are expected to inform an upcoming 2018 Navy Shipbuilding Plan, service officials said.86 A January 12, 2017, press report states the following: 84 Hope Hodge Seck, “Navy Acquisition Chief: Surge to 355 Ships ‘Easily Done,’” DoD Buzz, January 13, 2017. 85 Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “Build More Ships, But Not New Designs: CNO Richardson To McCain,” Breaking Defense, January 17, 2017. 86 Kris Osborn, “Navy: Larger 355-Ship Fleet—‘Executable,’” Scout Warrior, January 24, 2017. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 55 Brian Cuccias, president of Ingalls Shipbuilding [a shipyard owned by Huntington Ingalls Industries (HII) that builds Navy destroyers and amphibious ships as well as Coast Guard cutters], said Ingalls, which is currently building 10 ships for four Navy and Coast Guard programs at its 800-acre facility in Pascagoula, Miss., could build more because it is using only 70 to 75 percent of its capacity.87 A March 2017 press report states the following: As the Navy calls for a larger fleet, shipbuilders are looking toward new contracts and ramping up their yards to full capacity.... The Navy is confident that U.S. shipbuilders will be able to meet an increased demand, said Ray Mabus, then-secretary of the Navy, during a speech at the Surface Navy Association’s annual conference in Arlington, Virginia. They have the capacity to “get there because of the ships we are building today,” Mabus said. “I don’t think we could have seven years ago.” Shipbuilders around the United States have “hot” production lines and are manufacturing vessels on multi-year or block buy contracts, he added. The yards have made investments in infrastructure and in the training of their workers. “We now have the basis ... [to] get to that much larger fleet,” he said.... Shipbuilders have said they are prepared for more work. At Ingalls Shipbuilding—a subsidiary of Huntington Ingalls Industries—10 ships are under construction at its Pascagoula, Mississippi, yard, but it is under capacity, said Brian Cuccias, the company’s president. The shipbuilder is currently constructing five guided-missile destroyers, the latest San Antonio-class amphibious transport dock ship, and two national security cutters for the Coast Guard. “Ingalls is a very successful production line right now, but it has the ability to actually produce a lot more in the future,” he said during a briefing with reporters in January. The company’s facility is currently operating at 75 percent capacity, he noted.... Austal USA—the builder of the Independence-variant of the littoral combat ship and the expeditionary fast transport vessel—is also ready to increase its capacity should the Navy require it, said Craig Perciavalle, the company’s president. The latest discussions are “certainly something that a shipbuilder wants to hear,” he said. “We do have the capability of increasing throughput if the need and demand were to arise, and then we also have the ability with the present workforce and facility to meet a different mix that could arise as well.” Austal could build fewer expeditionary fast transport vessels and more littoral combat ships, or vice versa, he added. “The key thing for us is to keep the manufacturing lines hot and really leverage the momentum that we’ve gained on both of the programs,” he said. The company—which has a 164-acre yard in Mobile, Alabama—is focused on the extension of the LCS and expeditionary fast transport ship program, but Perciavalle noted that it could look into manufacturing other types of vessels. 87 Marc Selinger, “Navy Needs More Aircraft to Match Ship Increase, Secretary [of the Navy] Says,” Defense Daily, January 12, 2017. See also Lee Hudson, “Ingalls Operating at About 75 Percent Capacity, Provided Info to Trump Team,” Inside the Navy, January 16, 2017. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 56 “We do have excess capacity to even build smaller vessels … if that opportunity were to arise and we’re pursuing that,” he said. Bryan Clark, a naval analyst at the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, a Washington, D.C.-based think tank, said shipbuilders are on average running between 70 and 80 percent capacity. While they may be ready to meet an increased demand for ships, it would take time to ramp up their workforces. However, the bigger challenge is the supplier industrial base, he said. “Shipyards may be able to build ships but the supplier base that builds the pumps … and the radars and the radios and all those other things, they don’t necessarily have that ability to ramp up,” he said. “You would need to put some money into building up their capacity.” That has to happen now, he added. Rear Adm. William Gallinis, program manager for program executive office ships, said what the Navy must be “mindful of is probably our vendor base that support the shipyards.” Smaller companies that supply power electronics and switchboards could be challenged, he said. “Do we need to re-sequence some of the funding to provide some of the facility improvements for some of the vendors that may be challenged? My sense is that the industrial base will size to the demand signal. We just need to be mindful of how we transition to that increased demand signal,” he said. The acquisition workforce may also see an increased amount of stress, Gallinis noted. “It takes a fair amount of experience and training to get a good contracting officer to the point to be [able to] manage contracts or procure contracts.” “But I don’t see anything that is insurmountable,” he added.88 At a May 24, 2017, hearing before the Seapower subcommittee of the Senate Armed Services Committee on the industrial-base aspects of the Navy’s 355-ship goal, John P. Casey, executive vice president–marine systems, General Dynamics Corporation (one of the country’s two principal builders of Navy ships) stated the following: It is our belief that the Nation’s shipbuilding industrial base can scale-up hot production lines for existing ships and mobilize additional resources to accomplish the significant challenge of achieving the 355-ship Navy as quickly as possible.... Supporting a plan to achieve a 355-ship Navy will be the most challenging for the nuclear submarine enterprise. Much of the shipyard and industrial base capacity was eliminated following the steep drop-off in submarine production that occurred with the cancellation of the Seawolf Program in 1992. The entire submarine industrial base at all levels of the supply chain will likely need to recapitalize some portion of its facilities, workforce, and supply chain just to support the current plan to build the Columbia Class SSBN program, while concurrently building Virginia Class SSNs. Additional SSN procurement will require industry to expand its plans and associated investment beyond the level today.... Shipyard labor resources include the skilled trades needed to fabricate, build and outfit major modules, perform assembly, test and launch of submarines, and associated support organizations that include planning, material procurement, inspection, quality assurance, and ship certification. Since there is no commercial equivalency for Naval nuclear submarine shipbuilding, these trade resources cannot be easily acquired in large numbers from other industries. Rather, these shipyard resources must be acquired and developed over time to ensure the unique knowledge and know-how associated with nuclear 88 Yasmin Tadjdeh, “Navy Shipbuilders Prepared for Proposed Fleet Buildup,” National Defense, March 2017. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 57 submarine shipbuilding is passed on to the next generation of shipbuilders. The mechanisms of knowledge transfer require sufficient lead time to create the proficient, skilled craftsmen in each key trade including welding, electrical, machining, shipfitting, pipe welding, painting, and carpentry, which are among the largest trades that would need to grow to support increased demand. These trades will need to be hired in the numbers required to support the increased workload. Both shipyards have scalable processes in place to acquire, train, and develop the skilled workforce they need to build nuclear ships. These processes and associated training facilities need to be expanded to support the increased demand. As with the shipyards, the same limiting factors associated with facilities, workforce, and supply chain also limit the submarine unique first tier suppliers and sub-tiers in the industrial base for which there is no commercial equivalency.... The supply base is the third resource that will need to be expanded to meet the increased demand over the next 20 years. During the OHIO, 688 and SEAWOLF construction programs, there were over 17,000 suppliers supporting submarine construction programs. That resource base was “rationalized” during submarine low rate production over the last 20 years. The current submarine industrial base reflects about 5,000 suppliers, of which about 3,000 are currently active (i.e., orders placed within the last 5 years), 80% of which are single or sole source (based on $). It will take roughly 20 years to build the 12 Columbia Class submarines that starts construction in FY21. The shipyards are expanding strategic sourcing of appropriate non-core products (e.g., decks, tanks, etc.) in order to focus on core work at each shipyard facility (e.g., module outfitting and assembly). Strategic sourcing will move demand into the supply base where capacity may exist or where it can be developed more easily. This approach could offer the potential for cost savings by competition or shifting work to lower cost work centers throughout the country. Each shipyard has a process to assess their current supply base capacity and capability and to determine where it would be most advantageous to perform work in the supply base.... Achieving the increased rate of production and reducing the cost of submarines will require the Shipbuilders to rely on the supply base for more non-core products such as structural fabrication, sheet metal, machining, electrical, and standard parts. The supply base must be made ready to execute work with submarine-specific requirements at a rate and volume that they are not currently prepared to perform. Preparing the supply base to execute increased demand requires early non-recurring funding to support cross-program construction readiness and EOQ funding to procure material in a manner that does not hold up existing ship construction schedules should problems arise in supplier qualification programs. This requires longer lead times (estimates of three years to create a new qualified, critical supplier) than the current funding profile supports.... We need to rely on market principles to allow suppliers, the shipyards and GFE material providers to sort through the complicated demand equation across the multiple ship programs. Supplier development funding previously mentioned would support non-recurring efforts which are needed to place increased orders for material in multiple market spaces. Examples would include valves, build-to-print fabrication work, commodities, specialty material, engineering components, etc. We are engaging our marine industry associations to help foster innovative approaches that could reduce costs and gain efficiency for this increased volume.... Supporting the 355-ship Navy will require Industry to add capability and capacity across the entire Navy Shipbuilding value chain. Industry will need to make investment decisions for additional capital spend starting now in order to meet a step change in demand that would begin in FY19 or FY20. For the submarine enterprise, the step change was already envisioned and investment plans that embraced a growth trajectory were already being formulated. Increasing demand by adding additional submarines will require scaling facility and workforce development plans to operate at a higher rate of production. The nuclear shipyards would also look to increase material procurement proportionally to the increased demand. In some cases, the shipyard facilities may be constrained with existing Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 58 capacity and may look to source additional work in the supply base where capacity exists or where there are competitive business advantages to be realized. Creating additional capacity in the supply base will require non-recurring investment in supplier qualification, facilities, capital equipment and workforce training and development. Industry is more likely to increase investment in new capability and capacity if there is certainty that the Navy will proceed with a stable shipbuilding plan. Positive signals of commitment from the Government must go beyond a published 30-year Navy Shipbuilding Plan and line items in the Future Years Defense Plan (FYDP) and should include  Multi-year contracting for Block procurement which provides stability in the industrial base and encourages investment in facilities and workforce development  Funding for supplier development to support training, qualification, and facilitization efforts—Electric Boat and Newport News have recommended to the Navy funding of $400M over a three-year period starting in 2018 to support supplier development for the Submarine Industrial Base as part of an Integrated Enterprise Plan Extended Enterprise initiative  Acceleration of Advance Procurement and/or Economic Order Quantities (EOQ) procurement from FY19 to FY18 for Virginia Block V  Government incentives for construction readiness and facilities / special tooling for shipyard and supplier facilities, which help cash flow capital investment ahead of construction contract awards  Procurement of additional production back-up (PBU) material to help ensure a ready supply of material to mitigate construction schedule risk.... So far, this testimony has focused on the Submarine Industrial Base, but the General Dynamics Marine Systems portfolio also includes surface ship construction. Unlike Electric Boat, Bath Iron Works and NASSCO are able to support increased demand without a significant increase in resources..... Bath Iron Works is well positioned to support the Administration’s announced goal of increasing the size of the Navy fleet to 355 ships. For BIW that would mean increasing the total current procurement rate of two DDG 51s per year to as many as four DDGs per year, allocated equally between BIW and HII. This is the same rate that the surface combatant industrial base sustained over the first decade of full rate production of the DDG 51 Class (1989-1999).... No significant capital investment in new facilities is required to accommodate delivering two DDGs per year. However, additional funding will be required to train future shipbuilders and maintain equipment. Current hiring and training processes support the projected need, and have proven to be successful in the recent past. BIW has invested significantly in its training programs since 2014 with the restart of the DDG 51 program and given these investments and the current market in Maine, there is little concern of meeting the increase in resources required under the projected plans. A predictable and sustainable Navy workload is essential to justify expanding hiring/training programs. BIW would need the Navy’s commitment that the Navy’s plan will not change before it would proceed with additional hiring and training to support increased production. BIW’s supply chain is prepared to support a procurement rate increase of up to four DDG 51s per year for the DDG 51 Program. BIW has long-term purchasing agreements in place for all major equipment and material for the DDG 51 Program. These agreements provide for material lead time and pricing, and are not constrained by the number of ships ordered in a year. BIW confirmed with all of its critical suppliers that they can support this increased procurement rate.... Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 59 The Navy’s Force Structure Assessment calls for three additional ESBs. Additionally, NASSCO has been asked by the Navy and the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) to evaluate its ability to increase the production rate of T-AOs to two ships per year. NASSCO has the capacity to build three more ESBs at a rate of one ship per year while building two T-AOs per year. The most cost effective funding profile requires funding ESB 6 in FY18 and the following ships in subsequent fiscal years to avoid increased cost resulting from a break in the production line. The most cost effective funding profile to enable a production rate of two T-AO ships per year requires funding an additional long lead time equipment set beginning in FY19 and an additional ship each year beginning in FY20. NASSCO must now reduce its employment levels due to completion of a series of commercial programs which resulted in the delivery of six ships in 2016. The proposed increase in Navy shipbuilding stabilizes NASSCO’s workload and workforce to levels that were readily demonstrated over the last several years. Some moderate investment in the NASSCO shipyard will be needed to reach this level of production. The recent CBO report on the costs of building a 355-ship Navy accurately summarized NASSCO’s ability to reach the above production rate stating, “building more … combat logistics and support ships would be the least problematic for the shipyards.”89 At the same hearing, Brian Cuccias, president, Ingalls Shipbuilding, Huntington Ingalls Industries (the country’s other principal builder of Navy ships) stated the following: Qualifying to be a supplier is a difficult process. Depending on the commodity, it may take up to 36 months. That is a big burden on some of these small businesses. This is why creating sufficient volume and exercising early contractual authorization and advance procurement funding is necessary to grow the supplier base, and not just for traditional long-lead time components; that effort needs to expand to critical components and commodities that today are controlling the build rate of submarines and carriers alike. Many of our suppliers are small businesses and can only make decisions to invest in people, plant and tooling when they are awarded a purchase order. We need to consider how we can make commitments to suppliers early enough to ensure material readiness and availability when construction schedules demand it. With questions about the industry’s ability to support an increase in shipbuilding, both Newport News and Ingalls have undertaken an extensive inventory of our suppliers and assessed their ability to ramp up their capacity. We have engaged many of our key suppliers to assess their ability to respond to an increase in production. The fortunes of related industries also impact our suppliers, and an increase in demand from the oil and gas industry may stretch our supply base. Although some low to moderate risk remains, I am convinced that our suppliers will be able to meet the forecasted Navy demand.... I strongly believe that the fastest results can come from leveraging successful platforms on current hot production lines. We commend the Navy’s decision in 2014 to use the existing LPD 17 hull form for the LX(R), which will replace the LSD-class amphibious dock landing ships scheduled to retire in the coming years. However, we also recommend that the concept of commonality be taken even further to best optimize efficiency, affordability and capability. Specifically, rather than continuing with a new design for LX(R) within the “walls” of the LPD hull, we can leverage our hot production line and supply chain and offer the Navy a variant of the existing LPD design that satisfies the aggressive cost targets of the LX(R) program while delivering more capability and survivability to the fleet at a 89 John P. Casey, Executive Vice President – Marine Systems, General Dynamics Corporation, Testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee, Subcommittee on Seapower, 115th Congress, Supporting the 355-Ship Navy with Focus on Submarine Industrial Base, Washington, DC, May 24, 2017, pp. 3-18. See also Marjorie Censer, “BWX Technologies Weighs When To Ready for Additional Submarines,” Inside the Navy, May 29, 2017. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 60 significantly faster pace than the current program. As much as 10-15 percent material savings can be realized across the LX(R) program by purchasing respective blocks of at least five ships each under a multi-year procurement (MYP) approach. In the aggregate, continuing production with LPD 30 in FY18, coupled with successive MYP contracts for the balance of ships, may yield savings greater than $1 billion across an 11-ship LX(R) program. Additionally, we can deliver five LX(R)s to the Navy and Marine Corps in the same timeframe that the current plan would deliver two, helping to reduce the shortfall in amphibious warships against the stated force requirement of 38 ships. Multi-ship procurements, whether a formal MYP or a block-buy, are a proven way to reduce the price of ships. The Navy took advantage of these tools on both Virginia-class submarines and Arleigh Burke-class destroyers. In addition to the LX(R) program mentioned above, expanding multi-ship procurements to other ship classes makes sense.... The most efficient approach to lower the cost of the Ford class and meet the goal of an increased CVN fleet size is also to employ a multi-ship procurement strategy and construct these ships at three-year intervals. This approach would maximize the material procurement savings benefit through economic order quantities procurement and provide labor efficiencies to enable rapid acquisition of a 12-ship CVN fleet. This three-ship approach would save at least $1.5 billion, not including additional savings that could be achieved from government-furnished equipment. As part of its Integrated Enterprise Plan, we commend the Navy’s efforts to explore the prospect of material economic order quantity purchasing across carrier and submarine programs.90 At the same hearing, Matthew O. Paxton, president, Shipbuilders Council of America (SCA)—a trade association representing shipbuilders, suppliers, and associated firms—stated the following: To increase the Navy’s Fleet to 355 ships, a substantial and sustained investment is required in both procurement and readiness. However, let me be clear: building and sustaining the larger required Fleet is achievable and our industry stands ready to help achieve that important national security objective. To meet the demand for increased vessel construction while sustaining the vessels we currently have will require U.S. shipyards to expand their work forces and improve their infrastructure in varying degrees depending on ship type and ship mix – a requirement our Nation’s shipyards are eager to meet. But first, in order to build these ships in as timely and affordable manner as possible, stable and robust funding is necessary to sustain those industrial capabilities which support Navy shipbuilding and ship maintenance and modernization.... Beyond providing for the building of a 355-ship Navy, there must also be provision to fund the “tail,” the maintenance of the current and new ships entering the fleet. Target fleet size cannot be reached if existing ships are not maintained to their full service lives, while building those new ships. Maintenance has been deferred in the last few years because of across-the-board budget cuts.... The domestic shipyard industry certainly has the capability and know-how to build and maintain a 355-ship Navy. The Maritime Administration determined in a recent study on the Economic Benefits of the U.S. Shipyard Industry that there are nearly 110,000 skilled men and women in the Nation’s private shipyards building, repairing and maintaining America’s military and commercial fleets.1 The report found the U.S. shipbuilding industry supports nearly 400,000 jobs across the country and generates $25.1 billion in income and $37.3 billion worth of goods and services each year. In fact, the MARAD report found that the shipyard industry creates direct and induced employment in every 90 Statement of Brian Cuccias, President, Ingalls Shipbuilding, Huntington Ingalls Industries, Subcommittee on Seapower, Senate Armed Services Committee, May 24, 2017, pp. 4-11. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 61 State and Congressional District and each job in the private shipbuilding and repairing industry supports another 2.6 jobs nationally. This data confirms the significant economic impact of this manufacturing sector, but also that the skilled workforce and industrial base exists domestically to build these ships. Long-term, there needs to be a workforce expansion and some shipyards will need to reconfigure or expand production lines. This can and will be done as required to meet the need if adequate, stable budgets and procurement plans are established and sustained for the long-term. Funding predictability and sustainability will allow industry to invest in facilities and more effectively grow its skilled workforce. The development of that critical workforce will take time and a concerted effort in a partnership between industry and the federal government. U.S. shipyards pride themselves on implementing state of the art training and apprenticeship programs to develop skilled men and women that can cut, weld, and bend steel and aluminum and who can design, build and maintain the best Navy in the world. However, the shipbuilding industry, like so many other manufacturing sectors, faces an aging workforce. Attracting and retaining the next generation shipyard worker for an industry career is critical. Working together with the Navy, and local and state resources, our association is committed to building a robust training and development pipeline for skilled shipyard workers. In addition to repealing sequestration and stabilizing funding the continued development of a skilled workforce also needs to be included in our national maritime strategy.... In conclusion, the U.S. shipyard industry is certainly up to the task of building a 355-ship Navy and has the expertise, the capability, the critical capacity and the unmatched skilled workforce to build these national assets. Meeting the Navy’s goal of a 355-ship fleet and securing America’s naval dominance for the decades ahead will require sustained investment by Congress and Navy’s partnership with a defense industrial base that can further attract and retain a highly-skilled workforce with critical skill sets. Again, I would like to thank this Subcommittee for inviting me to testify alongside such distinguished witnesses. As a representative of our nation’s private shipyards, I can say, with confidence and certainty, that our domestic shipyards and skilled workers are ready, willing and able to build and maintain the Navy’s 355-ship Fleet.91 Employment Impact Building the additional ships that would be needed to achieve and maintain the 355-ship fleet could create many additional manufacturing and other jobs at shipyards, associated supplier firms, and elsewhere in the U.S. economy. A 2015 Maritime Administration (MARAD) report states Considering the indirect and induced impacts, each direct job in the shipbuilding and repairing industry is associated with another 2.6 jobs in other parts of the US economy; each dollar of direct labor income and GDP in the shipbuilding and repairing industry is associated with another $1.74 in labor income and $2.49 in GDP, respectively, in other parts of the US economy.92 91 Testimony of Matthew O. Paxton, President, Shipbuilders Council of America, before the United States Senate Committee on Armed Services, Subcommittee on Seapower, [on] Industry Perspectives on Options and Considerations for Achieving a 355-Ship Navy, May 24, 2017, pp. 3-8. 92 MARAD, The Economic Importance of the U.S. Shipbuilding and Repairing Industry, November 2015, pp. E-3, E-4. For another perspective on the issue of the impact of shipbuilding on the broader economy, see Edward G. Keating et al., The Economic Consequences of Investing in Shipbuilding, Case Studies in the United States and Sweden, RAND Corporation, 2015. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 62 A March 2017 press report states, “Based on a 2015 economic impact study, the Shipbuilders Council of America [a trade association for U.S. shipbuilders and associated supplier firms] believes that a 355-ship Navy could add more than 50,000 jobs nationwide.”93 The 2015 economic impact study referred to in that quote might be the 2015 MARAD study discussed in the previous paragraph. An estimate of more than 50,000 additional jobs nationwide might be viewed as a higher-end estimate; other estimates might be lower. A June 14, 2017, press report states the following: “The shipbuilding industry will need to add between 18,000 and 25,000 jobs to build to a 350-ship Navy, according to Matthew Paxton, president of the Shipbuilders Council of America, a trade association representing the shipbuilding industrial base. Including indirect jobs like suppliers, the ramp-up may require a boost of 50,000 workers.”94 93 Yasmin Tadjdeh, “Navy Shipbuilders Prepared for Proposed Fleet Buildup,” National Defense, March 2017. Similarly, another press report states the following: “The Navy envisioned by Trump could create more than 50,000 jobs, the Shipbuilders Council of America, a trade group representing U.S. shipbuilders, repairers and suppliers, told Reuters.” (Mike Stone, “Missing from Trump’s Grand Navy Plan: Skilled Workers to Build the Fleet,” Reuters, March 17, 2017.) 94 Jaqueline Klimas, “Growing Shipbuilding Workforce Seen as Major Challenge for Trump’s Navy Buildup,” Politico, June 14, 2017. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 63 Appendix E. A Summary of Some Acquisition Lessons Learned for Navy Shipbuilding This appendix presents a general summary of lessons learned in Navy shipbuilding, reflecting comments made repeatedly by various sources over the years. These lessons learned include the following:  At the outset, get the operational requirements for the program right. Properly identify the program’s operational requirements at the outset. Manage risk by not trying to do too much in terms of the program’s operational requirements, and perhaps seek a so-called 70%-to-80% solution (i.e., a design that is intended to provide 70%-80% of desired or ideal capabilities). Achieve a realistic balance up front between operational requirements, risks, and estimated costs.  Impose cost discipline up front. Use realistic price estimates, and consider not only development and procurement costs, but life-cycle operation and support (O&S) costs.  Employ competition where possible in the awarding of design and construction contracts.  Use a contract type that is appropriate for the amount of risk involved, and structure its terms to align incentives with desired outcomes.  Minimize design/construction concurrency by developing the design to a high level of completion before starting construction and by resisting changes in requirements (and consequent design changes) during construction.  Properly supervise construction work. Maintain an adequate number of properly trained Supervisor of Shipbuilding (SUPSHIP) personnel.  Provide stability for industry, in part by using, where possible, multiyear procurement (MYP) or block buy contracting.  Maintain a capable government acquisition workforce that understands what it is buying, as well as the above points. Identifying these lessons is arguably not the hard part—most if not all these points have been cited for years. The hard part, arguably, is living up to them without letting circumstances lead program-execution efforts away from these guidelines. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 64 Appendix F. Some Considerations Relating to Warranties in Shipbuilding Contracts This appendix presents some considerations relating to warranties in shipbuilding contracts and other defense acquisition. In discussions of Navy (and also Coast Guard) shipbuilding, one question that sometimes arises is whether including a warranty in a shipbuilding contract is preferable to not including one. The question can arise, for example, in connection with a GAO finding that “the Navy structures shipbuilding contracts so that it pays shipbuilders to build ships as part of the construction process and then pays the same shipbuilders a second time to repair the ship when construction defects are discovered.”95 Including a warranty in a shipbuilding contract (or a contract for building some other kind of defense end item), while potentially valuable, might not always be preferable to not including one—it depends on the circumstances of the acquisition, and it is not necessarily a valid criticism of an acquisition program to state that it is using a contract that does not include a warranty (or a weaker form of a warranty rather than a stronger one). Including a warranty generally shifts to the contractor the risk of having to pay for fixing problems with earlier work. Although that in itself could be deemed desirable from the government’s standpoint, a contractor negotiating a contract that will have a warranty will incorporate that risk into its price, and depending on how much the contractor might charge for doing that, it is possible that the government could wind up paying more in total for acquiring the item (including fixing problems with earlier work on that item) than it would have under a contract without a warranty. When a warranty is not included in the contract and the government pays later on to fix problems with earlier work, those payments can be very visible, which can invite critical comments from observers. But that does not mean that including a warranty in the contract somehow frees the government from paying to fix problems with earlier work. In a contract that includes a warranty, the government will indeed pay something to fix problems with earlier work—but it will make the payment in the less-visible (but still very real) form of the up-front charge for including the warranty, and that charge might be more than what it would have cost the government, under a contract without a warranty, to pay later on for fixing those problems. From a cost standpoint, including a warranty in the contract might or might not be preferable, depending on the risk that there will be problems with earlier work that need fixing, the potential cost of fixing such problems, and the cost of including the warranty in the contract. The point is that the goal of avoiding highly visible payments for fixing problems with earlier work and the goal of minimizing the cost to the government of fixing problems with earlier work are separate and different goals, and that pursuing the first goal can sometimes work against achieving the second goal.96 95 See Government Accountability Office, Navy Shipbuilding[:] Past Performance Provides Valuable Lessons for Future Investments, GAO-18-238SP, June 2018, p. 21. A graphic on page 21 shows a GAO finding that the government was financially responsible for shipbuilder deficiencies in 96% of the cases examined by GAO, and that the shipbuilder was financially responsible for shipbuilder deficiencies in 4% of the cases. 96 It can also be noted that the country’s two largest builders of Navy ships—General Dynamics (GD) and Huntington Ingalls Industries (HII)—derive about 60% and 96%, respectively, of their revenues from U.S. government work. (See General Dynamics, 2016 Annual Report, page 9 of Form 10-K [PDF page 15 of 88]) and Huntington Ingalls Industries, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 65 The Department of Defense’s guide on the use of warranties states the following: Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) 46.7 states that “the use of warranties is not mandatory.” However, if the benefits to be derived from the warranty are commensurate with the cost of the warranty, the CO [contracting officer] should consider placing it in the contract. In determining whether a warranty is appropriate for a specific acquisition, FAR Subpart 46.703 requires the CO to consider the nature and use of the supplies and services, the cost, the administration and enforcement, trade practices, and reduced requirements. The rationale for using a warranty should be documented in the contract file.... In determining the value of a warranty, a CBA [cost-benefit analysis] is used to measure the life cycle costs of the system with and without the warranty. A CBA is required to determine if the warranty will be cost beneficial. CBA is an economic analysis, which basically compares the Life Cycle Costs (LCC) of the system with and without the warranty to determine if warranty coverage will improve the LCCs. In general, five key factors will drive the results of the CBA: cost of the warranty + cost of warranty administration + compatibility with total program efforts + cost of overlap with Contractor support + intangible savings. Effective warranties integrate reliability, maintainability, supportability, availability, and life-cycle costs. Decision factors that must be evaluated include the state of the weapon system technology, the size of the warranted population, the likelihood that field performance requirements can be achieved, and the warranty period of performance.97 2016 Annual Report, page 5 of Form 10-K [PDF page 19 of 134]). These two shipbuilders operate the only U.S. shipyards currently capable of building several major types of Navy ships, including submarines, aircraft carriers, large surface combatants, and amphibious ships. Thus, even if a warranty in a shipbuilding contract with one of these firms were to somehow mean that the government did not have pay under the terms of that contract—either up front or later on—for fixing problems with earlier work done under that contract, there would still be a question as to whether the government would nevertheless wind up eventually paying much of that cost as part of the price of one or more future contracts the government may have that firm. 97 Department of Defense, Department of Defense Warranty Guide, Version 1.0, September 2009, accessed July 13, 2017, at https://www.acq.osd.mil/dpap/pdi/uid/docs/departmentofdefensewarrantyguide[1].doc. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 66 Appendix G. Avoiding Procurement Cost Growth vs. Minimizing Procurement Costs This appendix presents some considerations relating to avoiding procurement cost growth vs. minimizing procurement costs in shipbuilding and other defense acquisition. The affordability challenge posed by the Navy’s shipbuilding plans can reinforce the strong oversight focus on preventing or minimizing procurement cost growth in Navy shipbuilding programs, which is one expression of a strong oversight focus on preventing or minimizing cost growth in DOD acquisition programs in general. This oversight focus may reflect in part an assumption that avoiding or minimizing procurement cost growth is always synonymous with minimizing procurement cost. It is important to note, however, that as paradoxical as it may seem, avoiding or minimizing procurement cost growth is not always synonymous with minimizing procurement cost, and that a sustained, singular focus on avoiding or minimizing procurement cost growth might sometimes lead to higher procurement costs for the government. How could this be? Consider the example of a design for the lead ship of a new class of Navy ships. The construction cost of this new design is uncertain, but is estimated to be likely somewhere between Point A (a minimum possible figure) and Point D (a maximum possible figure). (Point D, in other words, would represent a cost estimate with a 100% confidence factor, meaning there is a 100% chance that the cost would come in at or below that level.) If the Navy wanted to avoid cost growth on this ship, it could simply set the ship’s procurement cost at Point D. Industry would likely be happy with this arrangement, and there likely would be no cost growth on the ship. The alternative strategy open to the Navy is to set the ship’s target procurement cost at some figure between Points A and D—call it Point B—and then use that more challenging target cost to place pressure on industry to sharpen its pencils so as to find ways to produce the ship at that lower cost. (Navy officials sometimes refer to this as “pressurizing” industry.) In this example, it might turn out that industry efforts to reduce production costs are not successful enough to build the ship at the Point B cost. As a result, the ship experiences one or more rounds of procurement cost growth, and the ship’s procurement cost rises over time from Point B to some higher figure—call it Point C. Here is the rub: Point C, in spite of incorporating one or more rounds of cost growth, might nevertheless turn out to be lower than Point D, because Point C reflected efforts by the shipbuilder to find ways to reduce production costs that the shipbuilder might have put less energy into pursuing if the Navy had simply set the ship’s procurement cost initially at Point D. Setting the ship’s cost at Point D, in other words, may eliminate the risk of cost growth on the ship, but does so at the expense of creating a risk of the government paying more for the ship than was actually necessary. DOD could avoid cost growth on new procurement programs starting tomorrow by simply setting costs for those programs at each program’s equivalent of Point D. But as a result of this strategy, DOD could well wind up leaving money on the table in some instances—of not, in other words, minimizing procurement costs. DOD does not have to set a cost precisely at Point D to create a potential risk in this regard. A risk of leaving money on the table, for example, is a possible downside of requiring DOD to budget for its acquisition programs at something like an 80% confidence factor—an approach that some observers have recommended—because a cost at the 80% confidence factor is a cost that is likely fairly close to Point D. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 67 Procurement cost growth is often embarrassing for DOD and industry, and can damage their credibility in connection with future procurement efforts. Procurement cost growth can also disrupt congressional budgeting by requiring additional appropriations to pay for something Congress thought it had fully funded in a prior year. For this reason, there is a legitimate public policy value to pursuing a goal of having less rather than more procurement cost growth. Procurement cost growth, however, can sometimes be in part the result of DOD efforts to use lower initial cost targets as a means of pressuring industry to reduce production costs—efforts that, notwithstanding the cost growth, might be partially successful. A sustained, singular focus on avoiding or minimizing cost growth, and of punishing DOD for all instances of cost growth, could discourage DOD from using lower initial cost targets as a means of pressurizing industry, which could deprive DOD of a tool for controlling procurement costs. The point here is not to excuse away cost growth, because cost growth can occur in a program for reasons other than DOD’s attempt to pressurize industry. Nor is the point to abandon the goal of seeking lower rather than higher procurement cost growth, because, as noted above, there is a legitimate public policy value in pursuing this goal. The point, rather, is to recognize that this goal is not always synonymous with minimizing procurement cost, and that a possibility of some amount of cost growth might be expected as part of an optimal government strategy for minimizing procurement cost. Recognizing that the goals of seeking lower rather than higher cost growth and of minimizing procurement cost can sometimes be in tension with one another can lead to an approach that takes both goals into consideration. In contrast, an approach that is instead characterized by a sustained, singular focus on avoiding and minimizing cost growth may appear virtuous, but in the end may wind up costing the government more. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 68 Appendix H. Size of the Navy and Navy Shipbuilding Rate Size of the Navy Table H-1 shows the size of the Navy in terms of total number of ships since FY1948; the numbers shown in the table reflect changes over time in the rules specifying which ships count toward the total. Differing counting rules result in differing totals, and for certain years, figures reflecting more than one set of counting rules are available. Figures in the table for FY1978 and subsequent years reflect the battle force ships counting method, which is the set of counting rules established in the early 1980s for public policy discussions of the size of the Navy. As shown in the table, the total number of battle force ships in the Navy reached a late-Cold War peak of 568 at the end of FY1987 and began declining thereafter.98 The Navy fell below 300 battle force ships in August 2003 and as of April 29, 2020, included 299 battle force ships. As discussed in Appendix C, historical figures for total fleet size might not be a reliable yardstick for assessing the appropriateness of proposals for the future size and structure of the Navy, particularly if the historical figures are more than a few years old, because the missions to be performed by the Navy, the mix of ships that make up the Navy, and the technologies that are available to Navy ships for performing missions all change over time, and because the number of ships in the fleet in an earlier year might itself have been inappropriate (i.e., not enough or more than enough) for meeting the Navy’s mission requirements in that year. For similar reasons, trends over time in the total number of ships in the Navy are not necessarily a reliable indicator of the direction of change in the fleet’s ability to perform its stated missions. An increasing number of ships in the fleet might not necessarily mean that the fleet’s ability to perform its stated missions is increasing, because the fleet’s mission requirements might be increasing more rapidly than ship numbers and average ship capability. Similarly, a decreasing number of ships in the fleet might not necessarily mean that the fleet’s ability to perform stated missions is decreasing, because the fleet’s mission requirements might be declining more rapidly than numbers of ships, or because average ship capability and the percentage of time that ships are in deployed locations might be increasing quickly enough to more than offset reductions in total ship numbers. 98 Some publications have stated that the Navy reached a peak of 594 ships at the end of FY1987. This figure, however, is the total number of active ships in the fleet, which is not the same as the total number of battle force ships. The battle force ships figure is the number used in government discussions of the size of the Navy. In recent years, the total number of active ships has been larger than the total number of battle force ships. For example, the Naval History and Heritage Command (formerly the Naval Historical Center) states that as of November 16, 2001, the Navy included a total of 337 active ships, while the Navy states that as of November 19, 2001, the Navy included a total of 317 battle force ships. Comparing the total number of active ships in one year to the total number of battle force ships in another year is thus an apples-to-oranges comparison that in this case overstates the decline since FY1987 in the number of ships in the Navy. As a general rule to avoid potential statistical distortions, comparisons of the number of ships in the Navy over time should use, whenever possible, a single counting method. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 69 Table H-1. Total Number of Ships in Navy Since FY1948 FYa Number FYa Number FYa Number FYa Number 1948 737 1970 769 1992 466 2014 289 1949 690 1971 702 1993 435 2015 271 1950 634 1972 654 1994 391 2016 275 1951 980 1973 584 1995 373 2017 279 1952 1,097 1974 512 1996 356 2018 286 1953 1,122 1975 496 1997 354 2019 290 1954 1,113 1976 476 1998 333 1955 1,030 1977 464 1999 317 1956 973 1978 468 2000 318 1957 967 1979 471 2001 316 1958 890 1980 477 2002 313 1959 860 1981 490 2003 297 1960 812 1982 513 2004 291 1961 897 1983 514 2005 282 1962 959 1984 524 2006 281 1963 916 1985 541 2007 279 1964 917 1986 556 2008 282 1965 936 1987 568 2009 285 1966 947 1988 565 2010 288 1967 973 1989 566 2011 284 1968 976 1990 547 2012 287 1969 926 1991 526 2013 285 Source: Compiled by CRS using U.S. Navy data. Numbers shown reflect changes over time in the rules specifying which ships count toward the total. Figures for FY1978 and subsequent years reflect the battle force ships counting method, which is the set of counting rules established in the early 1980s for public policy discussions of the size of the Navy. a. Data for earlier years in the table may be for the end of the calendar year (or for some other point during the year), rather than for the end of the fiscal year. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 70 Shipbuilding Rate Table H-2 shows past (FY1982-FY2019) and requested or programmed (FY2020-FY2024) rates of Navy ship procurement. Table H-2. Battle Force Ships Procured or Requested, FY1982-FY2024 (Procured in FY1982-FY2019; requested for FY2020, and programmed for FY2021-FY2024) 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 17 14 16 19 20 17 15 19 15 11 11 7 4 4 5 4 5 5 6 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 6 6 5 7 8 4 5 3 8 7 10 11 11 8 8 9 9 9 13 20 21 22 23 24 25 13 7 7 8 11 9 Source: CRS compilation based on Navy budget data and examination of defense authorization and appropriation committee and conference reports for each fiscal year. The table excludes nonbattle force ships that do not count toward the 355-ship goal, such as certain sealift and prepositioning ships operated by the Military Sealift Command and oceanographic ships operated by agencies such as the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Notes: (1) The totals shown for FY2006, FY2007, and FY2008, reflect the cancellation two LCSs funded in FY2006, another two LCSs funded in FY2007, and an LCS funded in FY2008. (2) The total shown for FY2012 includes two JHSVs—one that was included in the Navy’s FY2012 budget submission, and one that was included in the Army’s FY2012 budget submission. Until FY2012, JHSVs were being procured by both the Navy and the Army. The Army was to procure its fifth and final JHSV in FY2012, and this ship was included in the Army’s FY2012 budget submission. In May 2011, the Navy and Army signed a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) transferring the Army’s JHSVs to the Navy. In the FY2012 DOD Appropriations Act (Division A of H.R. 2055/P.L. 112-74 of December 23, 2011), the JHSV that was in the Army’s FY2012 budget submission was funded through the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) appropriation account, along with the JHSV that the Navy had included in its FY0212 budget submission. The four JHSVs that were procured through the Army’s budget prior to FY2012, however, are not included in the annual totals shown in this table. (3) The figures shown for FY2019 and FY2020 reflect a Navy decision to show the aircraft carrier CVN-81 as a ship to be procured in FY2020 rather than a ship that was procured in FY2019. Congress, as part of its action on the Navy’s proposed FY2019 budget, authorized the procurement of CVN-81 in FY2019. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 71 Appendix I. Procurement Dates of CVN-81, LPD-31, and LHA-9 This appendix presents background information on congressional action regarding the procurement dates of three ships—the aircraft carrier CVN-81, the LPD-17 Flight II amphibious ship LPD-31, and the amphibious assault ship LHA-9. In reviewing the bullet points presented below, it can be noted that procurement funding is funding for a ship that is either being procured in that fiscal year or has been procured in a prior fiscal year, while advance procurement (AP) funding is funding for a ship that is to be procured in a future fiscal year.99 CVN-81 Aircraft Carrier The Navy’s FY2020 budget submission presented the aircraft carrier CVN-81 as a ship requested for procurement in FY2020, and the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission presents CVN-81 as a ship that Congress procured in FY2020. Consistent with congressional action on the Navy’s FY2019 budget regarding the procurement of CVN-81, this CRS report treats CVN-81 as a ship that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and provided procurement funding for) in FY2019. Discussion in this CRS report of the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission is adjusted to show CVN-81 as a ship that was procured in FY2019. This CRS report treats CVN-81 as a ship that Congress procured in FY2019 consistent with the following:  Within Section 121 of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (H.R. 5515/P.L. 115-232 of August 13, 2018)—the provision that authorized a two-ship block buy contract for CVN-80 and CVN-81—subsection (a)(1) specifically authorizes a contract for the procurement of CVN-81 “beginning with the fiscal year 2019 program year.” The header for subsection (a)(1) is “Procurement Authorized.”  Consistent with Section 121(a)(1), the funding table for the Navy’s shipbuilding account in the conference report (H.Rept. 115-874 of July 25, 2018) on H.R. 5515 shows a quantity of “1” in line 002 of the FY2019 SCN (Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy) appropriation account. Line 002 is the line item for procurement (not advance procurement [AP]) funding for the CVN-78 program. A notation in the table for line 002 states that the procurement funding authorized for this line item is for “Authorize CVN81—One ship.”100 The funding table does not authorize any funding for line 003 of the FY2019 SCN account—the line item for AP funding for the CVN-78 program. (AP funding is funding for the procurement of a ship to be procured in a future fiscal year.)  Consistent with the two above points, the paragraph in the FY2019 DOD appropriations act (Division A of H.R. 6157/P.L. 115-245 of September 28, 2018) that makes appropriations for the SCN account makes procurement (not AP) appropriations for the CVN-78 program. This paragraph also states that “the funds made available by this Act for the Carrier Replacement Program (CVN-80) may be available to modify or enter into a new contract for the procurement of a 99 For additional discussion, see CRS Report RL31404, Defense Procurement: Full Funding Policy—Background, Issues, and Options for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke and Stephen Daggett. 100 H.Rept. 115-874, p. 1164. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 72 Ford-class aircraft carrier designated CVN–81 pursuant to section 121 of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019.”  Consistent with this bill language, the funding table for the SCN account in the joint explanatory statement for H.R. 6157 shows that this funding was provided for line 2 of the FY2019 SCN account (CVN-78 program procurement funding), not line 3 of the FY2019 SCN account (CVN-78 program AP funding).101  Consistent with all of the above points, the Navy’s FY2020 budget submission shows the $618 million in FY2019 funding for CVN-81 as full funding (meaning funding for a procured ship), rather than AP funding (meaning funding for a ship to be procured in a future fiscal year).102  The House Armed Services Committee’s report (H.Rept. 116-120 of June 19, 2019) on H.R. 2500, the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act, recommended authorizing the procurement of no aircraft carrier in FY2020 due to “CVN–81 previously authorized.”103  The Senate Armed Services Committee’s report (S.Rept. 116-48 of June 11, 2019) on S. 1790, the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act, recommended authorizing the procurement of no aircraft carrier in FY2020 due to “CVN-81 authorized in NDAA [FY]2019.”104  The conference report (H.Rept. 116-333 of December 9, 2019) on S. 1790/P.L. 116-92 of December 20, 2019, the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act, authorized the procurement of no aircraft carrier in FY2020 due to “CVN–81 previously authorized.”105  The House Appropriations Committee’s report (H.Rept. 116-84 of May 23, 2019) on H.R. 2968, the FY2020 DOD Appropriations Act, adjusted the Navy’s FY2020 budget submission to show that no aircraft carrier was being requested for procurement in FY2020.106  The Senate Appropriations Committee’s report (S.Rept. 116-103 of September 12, 2019) on S. 2474, the FY2020 DOD Appropriations Act, adjusted the Navy’s FY2020 budget submission to show that no aircraft carrier was being requested for procurement in FY2020.107 LPD-31—an LPD-17 Flight II Amphibious Ship The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission presents LPD-31, an LPD-17 Flight II amphibious ship, as a ship requested for procurement in FY2021. Consistent with congressional action on the Navy’s FY2020 budget regarding the procurement of LPD-31, this CRS report treats LPD-31 as a ship that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and provided procurement funding for) in FY2020. Discussion in this CRS report of the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission is adjusted to show LPD- 101 Joint explanatory statement for H.R. 6157, PDF pages 174 and 176 of 559. 102 Department of Defense, Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 President’s Budget Estimate Submission, Navy, Justification Book Volume 1 of 1, Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy, March 2019, p. 15 (PDF page 51 of 356). 103 H.Rept. 116-120, p. 378, line 002. 104 S.Rept. 116-48, p. 432, line 2. 105 H.Rept. 116-333, p. 1565, line 002. 106 H.Rept. 116-84, p. 173, line 2. 107 S.Rept. 116-103, p. 118, line XX. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 73 31 as a ship that was procured in FY2020. This CRS report treats LPD-31 as a ship that Congress procured in FY2020 consistent with the following:  The House Armed Services Committee’s report (H.Rept. 116-120 of June 19, 2019) on H.R. 2500, the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act, recommended authorizing the procurement of an LPD-17 Flight II ship in FY2020, showing a quantity increase of one ship above the Navy’s request and recommending procurement (not just AP) funding for the program.108  The Senate Armed Services Committee’s report (S.Rept. 116-48 of June 11, 2019) on S. 1790, the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act, recommended authorizing the procurement of an LPD-17 Flight II ship in FY2020, showing a quantity increase of one ship above the Navy’s request and recommending procurement (rather than AP) funding for the program.109  The conference report (H.Rept. 116-333 of December 9, 2019) on S. 1790/P.L. 116-92 of December 20, 2019, the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act, authorized the procurement of an LPD-17 Flight II ship in FY2020, showing a quantity increase of one ship above the Navy’s request and recommending procurement (rather than AP) funding for the program.110 Section 129 of S. 1790/P.L. 116-92 authorizes the Navy to enter into a contract, beginning in FY2020, for the procurement of LPD-31, and to use incremental funding to fund the contract.  The Senate Appropriations Committee’s report (S.Rept. 116-103 of September 12, 2019) on S. 2474, the FY2020 DOD Appropriations Act, recommended funding for the procurement of an LPD-17 Flight II ship in FY2020, showing a quantity increase of one ship above the Navy’s request and recommending procurement (rather than AP) funding for the program.111  The final version of the FY2020 DOD Appropriations Act (Division A of H.R. 1158/P.L. 116-93 of December 20, 2019) provides procurement (not AP) funding for an LPD-17 Flight II ship. The paragraph in this act that appropriates funding for the Navy’s shipbuilding account, including this ship, includes a provision stating “Provided further, That an appropriation made under the heading ‘Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy’ provided for the purpose of ‘Program increase—advance procurement for fiscal year 2020 LPD Flight II and/or multiyear procurement economic order quantity’ shall be considered to be for the purpose of ‘Program increase—advance procurement of LPD–31’.” This provision relates to funding appropriated in the FY2019 DOD Appropriations Act (Division A of H.R. 6157/P.L. 115-245 of September 28, 2018) for the procurement of an LPD-17 Flight II ship in FY2020, as originally characterized in the explanatory statement accompanying that act.112 108 H.Rept. 116-120, p. 379, line 012. 109 S.Rept. 116-48, p. 433, line 12. See also pp. 23-24 for associated report language. 110 H.Rept. 116-333, p. 1566, line 012. See also p. 1144 for associated report language. 111 S.Rept. 116-103, p. 118, line 12. See also p. 122 for associated report language. 112 See PDF page 176 of 559, line 12, of the explanatory statement for H.R. 6157/P.L. 115-245. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 74 LHA-9 Amphibious Assault Ship The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission presents the amphibious assault ship LHA-9 as a ship projected for procurement in FY2023. Consistent with congressional action on the Navy’s FY2020 budget regarding the procurement of LHA-9, this CRS report treats LHA-9 as a ship that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and provided procurement funding for) in FY2020. Discussion in this CRS report of the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission is adjusted to show LHA-9 as a ship that was procured in FY2020. This CRS report treats LHA-9 as a ship that Congress procured in FY2020 consistent with the following:  The Senate Armed Services Committee’s report (S.Rept. 116-48 of June 11, 2019) on S. 1790, the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act, recommended authorizing the procurement of LHA-9 in FY2020, showing a quantity increase of one ship above the Navy’s request and recommending procurement (rather than AP) funding for the program.113  The conference report (H.Rept. 116-333 of December 9, 2019) on S. 1790/P.L. 116-92 of December 20, 2019, the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act, authorized the procurement of LHA-9 in FY2020, showing a quantity increase of one ship above the Navy’s request and recommending procurement (rather than AP) funding for the program.114 Section 127 of S. 1790/P.L. 116-92 authorizes the Navy to enter into a contract for the procurement of LHA-9 and to use incremental funding provided during the period FY2019-FY2025 to fund the contract.  The Senate Appropriations Committee’s report (S.Rept. 116-103 of September 12, 2019) on S. 2474, the FY2020 DOD Appropriations Act, recommended funding for the procurement of an LHA amphibious assault ship in FY2020, showing a quantity increase of one ship above the Navy’s request and recommending procurement (rather than AP) funding for the program.115  The final version of the FY2020 DOD Appropriations Act (Division A of H.R. 1158/P.L. 116-93 of December 20, 2019) provides procurement (not AP) funding for an LHA amphibious assault ship. The explanatory statement for Division A of H.R. 1158/P.L. 116-93 states that the funding is for LHA-9.116 113 S.Rept. 116-48, p. 433, line 15. 114 H.Rept. 116-333, p. 1566, line 015. 115 S.Rept. 116-103, p. 118, line 15. 116 Explanatory statement for Division A of H.R. 1158, PDF page 175 of 414, line 15. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 75 Appendix J. Letters from Members of Congress Regarding COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Impact on Defense Industry and Workforce This appendix presents the text of March 19 and March 27 letters from Members of Congress from Maine to DOD and the Navy regarding the impacts of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation on the large private-sector U.S. shipyards that build the Navy’s major warships. March 19, 2020, Letter On March 19, 2020, Members of Congress from Maine sent a letter to the Secretary of Defense and the Acting Secretary of the Navy “about the stability of the defense industrial base as the whole nation combats the current novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak.” The text of the letter is as follows: We are deeply concerned about the stability of the defense industrial base as the whole nation combats the current novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. We are equally worried about the health and safety risks to the industrial bases’ primary asset—its skilled workforce—as defense companies struggle to support our nation’s military while also managing the unique challenge we face today. In Maine, workers at shipbuilder Bath Iron Works, as well as at other defense suppliers of all sizes, must now contend with significant health concerns at work while also arranging to care for their children who are now staying at home due to school closures. The strain and stress on our skilled workforce today are without recent precedent. Given these challenges, the Department of Defense and the Navy must immediately act to protect our nation’s defense industrial base, including our nation’s shipyards. First, we ask that you work to mitigate cash flow and other financial burdens that contractors and subcontractors may face during this time of crisis. This includes providing clear guidance and relief from contract requirements that are uniquely impacted by COVID-19. Additionally, we ask that you take any actions possible to accelerate or advance payments or new contract obligations in order to provide immediate stability to the industrial base. If additional funding or new legal authorities are required to provide such assistance to industry, we stand ready to immediately assist the Department. Finally, we ask that you clarify your planning and public guidance to ensure a stable industrial base while also ensuring the health and safety of the defense industrial base workforce. The safety of defense industry workers is paramount, and we are mindful that insufficiently mitigating the impact of COVID-19 now could lead to deeper impacts in later months or years if this pandemic continues for an extended period. An outbreak of COVID-19 at one of our nation’s shipyards or other large defense contractors could truly be devastating to our national defense. We ask you to work with and support industry to take all necessary protective actions. Thank you for your attention to the important issue, and we look forward to your quick response.117 117 Letter from Senator Susan M. Collins, Senator Angus S. King, Jr., Representative Chellie Pingree, and Representative Jared Golden to Secretary of Defense Mark Esper and Acting Secretary of the Navy Thomas B. Modly, dated March 19, 2020, accessed on April 1, 2020, at https://www.collins.senate.gov/sites/default/files/2020.03.19%20-%20ME%20Delegation%20letter%20to%20DOD%20and%20Navy%20re%20defense%20industrial%20base.pdf. For Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 76 March 27, 2020, Letter On March 27, 2020, Members of Congress from Maine sent a follow-on letter to the Acting Secretary of the Navy expressing their concern about risks posed by the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation to the Navy’s shipyard defense industrial base workforce. The text of the letter is as follows: We appreciate the steps the Navy has recently taken to ensure the stability of the nation’s defense industrial base, as well as your recent phone discussion with Senator Collins on this topic. The Department’s many efforts to address the concerns of these vital industry partners will likely help many suppliers remain viable during this challenging time. As the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) spreads across our nation, however, we continue to be concerned about risks to the workforce that sustains the Navy’s shipyard defense industrial base. In many states, such as Maine, Governors have issued orders mandating the closure of all nonessential businesses and placed restrictions on public gatherings due to the current risks to public health and safety of the deadly virus. In response to this pandemic, the Navy earlier issued direction to each of its four public shipyards intended to limit the potential exposure of shipyard workers to COVID-19 while also maximizing the important national security work accomplished. This included the liberal use of telework, as well as permitting the most vulnerable workers to take paid administrative leave based on Centers for Disease Control (CDC) guidelines, such as older individuals or those who have preexisting health conditions, as well as those who have family members with preexisting health conditions. We urge you to provide similar guidelines to our nation’s large private shipyards, the workers at which face similar health and safety concerns, and to permit necessary contract or deadline flexibility and funding to ensure such guidance would be feasible to implement for these shipyards. We appreciate that it would ordinarily not be appropriate for the Navy to require or recommend particular workforce management policies of its private contractors. However, we are dealing with a highly contagious and deadly pandemic unlike anything our country has faced in over a century, and private shipyards are working to simultaneously maintain contractual obligations while complying with critical state and local public health orders. Therefore, we believe the Navy should take aggressive actions to ensure the health of the shipyard industrial base workforce is not put at undue risk as governments at all levels work to halt the spread of COVID-19. Again, thank you for your attention to this important issue, and we look forward to your prompt response.118 April 10, 2020, Letter On April 10, 2020, Member of Congress representing districts associated with the four government-owned, government-operated naval shipyards (NSYs) sent a letter to the Acting press reports about this letter, see Aaron Mehta, “Maine Lawmakers Want Contract Relief, Quicker Payments for Industry to Combat COVID-19 Impact,” Defense News, March 19, 2020; and Mallory Shelbourne, “Maine Lawmakers Press Esper, Modly to Help Industrial Base Face Effects of Coronavirus,” InsideDefense.com, March 20, 2020. 118 Letter from Senator Susan M. Collins, Senator Angus S. King, Jr., Representative Chellie Pingree, and Representative Jared Golden to Acting Secretary of the Navy Thomas B. Modly, dated March 27, 2020, accessed on April 1, 2020, at https://www.collins.senate.gov/sites/default/files/2020.03.27%20-%20follow%20up%20letter%20Maine%20delegation%20letter%20to%20Sec.%20Modly%20final.pdf. For a press report about this letter, see Scott Thistle, “Maine’s Congressional Delegation Urges Navy to Ease Pressure on BIW to Keep Operating,” Portland (ME) Press Herald, March 27, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 77 Secretary of the Navy asking that the Navy authorize incentive pay for workers at the NSYs. The text of the letter is as follows: At a time when our nation faces an unprecedented public health crisis and the majority of governors have enacted stay at home orders in their states, thousands of federal civilian workers have continued to report for duty each day at the Navy’s four public shipyards. These workers perform a critical service to our country and help maintain the aircraft carriers, submarines, and other warships that ensure our national security and protect the American people. We are proud to represent in Congress these steadfast and dedicated workers. The health of the workers and their families is critical to their ability to meet the needs of the mission and to continue that mission. They know that our Navy and nation’s sailors count on them to ensure the readiness of the fleet to respond to national security threats. Because they have continued to report for duty during this public health emergency, we ask the Navy to authorize incentive pay for these essential workers. Such incentive pay would conform to guidance already promulgated by the Office of Personnel Management to federal agencies and departments that allows for retention incentives of up to a certain percentage of basic pay to a group or category of employees. We ask that the authorization cover the duration of this crisis. We further ask that every effort be made to provide Personal Protective Equipment as soon as possible to those workers at greatest exposure. There is no doubt that our federal workers are some of this country’s greatest assets. The Navy cannot fulfil its mission without these workers. With that in mind, we believe that authorizing incentive pay is one much needed step to show them that the federal government and Navy have their backs when they most deserve and need that support.119 119 Letter from Representatives Derek Kilmer, Elaine Luria, Chellie Pingree, Robert C. “Bobby’ Scott, Chris Pappas, and Ed Case, to Acting Secretary of the Navy James E. McPherson, dated April 10, 2020, accessed on April 22, 2020, at https://kilmer.house.gov/imo/media/doc/Kilmer%20Shipyard%20Worker%20Letter.pdf. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 78 Appendix K. DOD and Navy Memoranda and Press Reports Regarding COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Impact on Shipbuilding Programs This appendix presents excerpts from DOD and Navy memoranda and from press reports regarding the potential impact of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation on the execution of Navy (and Coast Guard) shipbuilding programs. DOD and Navy Memoranda This section provides information on some DOD and Navy memoranda relating to contracting and execution of acquisition programs during the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation that have been reported in the press. It is not a comprehensive listing of such memoranda. DOD states that as of April 30, 2020, it had issued 22 guidance actions aimed at helping relieve COVID-19 (coronavirus) impacts for the contracting community.120 March 20 DOD Memo on Defense Contractors as Critical Infrastructure A March 20, 2020, press report stated: The U.S. Defense Department has declared that defense contractors are “critical infrastructure” to national security, a designation that comes with an expectation to maintain a consistent, normal work schedule amid the outbreak of the new coronavirus, COVID-19. In a Friday [March 20] memo to industry, Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment Ellen Lord made it clear that she wants defense companies to continue to deliver their products and services to the Pentagon on time. “If you work in a critical infrastructure industry, as designated by the Department of Homeland Security, you have a special responsibility to maintain your normal work schedule,” Lord wrote. “We need your support and dedication in these trying times to ensure the security of this Nation. I understand that this national emergency presents a challenge and we are dedicated to working closely with you to ensure the safety of the workforce and accomplishments of the national security mission.” Lord also spelled out large swaths of the industrial base for which this order applies, including the aerospace sector; mechanical and software engineers; manufacturing/ production workers; IT support; security staff; security personnel; intelligence support; aircraft and weapon systems mechanics and maintainers; suppliers of medical suppliers and pharmaceuticals; and critical transportation. Included in the designation are personnel working for companies as well as subcontractors who perform under contract for the department. Contractors who perform tasks such as providing office supplies, recreational support or lawn care are not considered essential. By designating the defense industry in such a way, companies involved may be able to get around state-directed shutdowns such as the one in New York right now. Similarly designated workers include, among many others, law enforcement, health care providers, 120 Source: Ellen M. Lord, Deputy Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment, as quoted in Richard R. Burgess, “DoD’s Lord: Potential for 3-Month Slowdown in Defense Acquisition,” Seapower, April l30, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 79 water and power authorities, and IT support for emergency services—all of whom are still on duty in the current crisis. In the memo, Lord noted, companies involved should “follow guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as well as State and local government officials regarding strategies to limit disease spread.” Some companies have instituted work-from-home policies where applicable, although in cases such as production of defense equipment or work in secure facilities, that option appears unrealistic.121 March 20 DOD Memo on Progress Payments On March 20, 2020, the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment issued a memorandum to acquisition executives and other officials throughout DOD stating, “Effective immediately, in response to the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) national emergency, the progress payment rates at Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement (DFARS) 232.501-1 are increased to 90 percent for large business concerns and 95 percent for small business concerns.” The memorandum provides detailed instructions on the clauses in acquisition regulations that are to be used in implementing the direction.122 March 20 Navy Memo Withholds and Retentions On March 20, 2020, James Geurts, the Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development, and Acquisition (ASN RDA)—the Navy’s acquisition executive—issued a memorandum to the commanders of Navy system commands and Navy Program Executive Officers (PEOs) providing direction to reduce withholds and retentions, meaning the withholding and retention of government payments to contractors. Withholds and retentions are normally used by the government to encourage contractors who are not performing well to meet their contractual obligations. The text of the memorandum is as follows: Given the National Security Declaration by the President, it is imperative we keep the Nation’s, and the Navy’s, defense industrial base from going into extremis during the current COVID-19 crisis. A key element of this is to ensure companies, and in particular the underlying suppliers, remain solvent and available to support the Navy. The ship, air, weapon, ground, network/IT and associated repair industry, as part of the Defense Industrial Base, are elements of the Nation’s Critical Infrastructure as defined by DHS [Department of Homeland Security]. We need them operating now and as we come out of this crisis. My intent is that we remove barriers to maximize efficient execution of our existing contracts and award of our pending/future contracts. This includes immediate engagement on all activities to positively impact cash flow. As such, I request your teams to: 121 Aaron Mehta, “Pentagon Declares Defense Contractors ‘Critical Infrastructure,’ Must Continue Work,” Defense News, March 20, 2020. See also Tony Bertuca, “Defense Industrial Base Deemed ‘Critical’ Amid COVID-19 Shutdowns,” InsideDefense.com, March 20, 2020. See also Paul McCleary, “COVID-19: Lord Urges Defense Workers To Stay On The Job; Cites White House,” Breaking Defense, March 20, 2020. 122 Memorandum from Office of the Under Secretary of Defense, Acquisition and Sustainment, Subject: Class Deviation—Progress Payment Rates, undated but reportedly issued March 20, 2020. A copy of the memorandum was posted on March 20, 2020, at InsideDefense.com. See also Marjorie Censer, “New Pentagon Memo Increases Progress Payment Rates in Response to COVID-19 Outbreak,” InsideDefense.com, March 20, 2020. See also Anthony Capaccio, “Pentagon Raises Contractor Payments to Keep Cash Flowing,” Bloomberg, March 22, 2020; Cal Biesecker, “DoD Boosts Progress Payment Rates To Industry; Boeing To Pause Puget Sound Operations,” Defense Daily, March 23, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 80  Immediately reduce retentions/withholds on existing efforts to an absolute minimum.  Pay all our settled REAs [Requests for Equitable Adjustment]123 immediately, submit requests for obligation of expired funds where required in support of this immediately and resolve all remaining REAs as quickly as possible, including preparing provisional payments where appropriate with reservation of right of recoup any overpayment upon final settlement. I encourage you to set up dedicated teams to do this as max [maximum] pace.  Ensure retentions/withholds are at minimum allowable level for any new work placed under contract in 2020.  Ensure all government personnel required to process inspection, acceptance, invoicing and payments and resolve these type business issues are declared mission essential.  Adjust inspection criteria where needed to enable work execution at a faster rate and/or ensure work performed can be completed provided adequacy of work is ensured.  Where possible, accelerate negotiations and award for future work including the use of UCAs [Undefinitized Contract Actions]124 as necessary, including contract changes in the pipeline or existing contracts.  Where UCAs are necessary, maximize obligations and allowable expenditures against those UCAs. Consult with DASN (P) [Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Procurement)] on additional authorities up to and including obligations up to 100% [of available funding]. We are operating in a National Emergency and so we need to move out accordingly. This is not [a] business as usual situation. As the Navy’s acquisition and sustainment leaders, I expect you to be bold in implementing these measures.125 March 24 Navy Memo Regarding Research and Development Industrial Base On March 24, 2020, the Navy acquisition executive issued a memorandum directing the Chief of Naval Research (CNR), Navy system commands, and Navy Program Executive Officers (PEOs) to take various actions (including some similar to those listed above in the Navy’s March 20 memorandum) regarding the Navy’s research and development industrial base, so as to positively affect cash flow at research and development organizations, ensure that the current workload at these organizations is completed, and bring new partners into the Navy’s research and development industrial base.126 123 REAs are requests that contractors submit to the government for an adjustment to the contract price under a contract clause providing for such an adjustment. For brief online discussions of REAs, see “Requests for Equitable Adjustments (‘REAs’) and Claims,” Seidman & Associates, P.C., undated, accessed March 21, 2020, at https://www.seidmanlaw.com/requests-for-equitable-adjustments-and-claims; and “Definition of Equitable Adjustment FAR [Federal Acquisition Regulation] 52.243 in Government Contracts,” Watson & Associates, LLC, accessed March 21, 2020, at https://blog.theodorewatson.com/definition-of-equitable-adjustments-in-government-contracts. 124 UCAs are contract actions for which the contract terms, specifications, or price are not agreed upon before performance commences. For a brief online discussion of UCAs, see “Undefinitized Contract Actions (UCA),” AcqNotes, updated June 4, 2018, accessed March 21, 2020, at http://acqnotes.com/acqnote/careerfields/undefinitized-contract-actions-uca. 125 Memorandum from Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Research, Development, and Acquisition (ASN RD&D) [sic: ASN RD&A] to Navy Syscom Commanders and Program Executive Officers, Subject: (Intent and Direction) Withholds and Retentions During COVID-19, March 20, 2020. In the memorandum, some of the bullet points lacked periods at the end; in reprinting the text of the memorandum here, CRS has placed periods at the end of those bullet points. 126 Memorandum from Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Research, Development, and Acquisition to Chief of Naval Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 81 March 31 DOD Memo on Managing Defense-Contract Impacts of COVID-19 On March 30, 2020, the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment issued a memorandum on managing the impacts of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation on defense contracts. The memorandum stated that “the effects of COVID-19 will affect the cost, schedule, and performance of many DoD contracts.” The memorandum stated further: DoD contracts contain clauses that excuse performance delays, including Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) 52.249-14, Excusable Delays; various “Termination” clauses; and FAR 52.212-4 for commercial contracts. Each of these clauses provides that a contractor will not be in default because of a failure to perform the contract if the failure arises beyond the control and without the fault or negligence of the contractor. In the event of such a delay, the contractor is entitled to an equitable adjustment of the contract schedule. Where the contracting officer directs changes in the terms of contract performance, which may include recognition of COVID-19 impacts on performance under that contract, the contractor may also be entitled to an equitable adjustment to contract price using the standard FAR changes clauses (e.g., FAR 52.243-1 or FAR 52.243-2). Requests for equitable adjustment must be considered on a case-by-case basis, in consideration of the particular circumstances of each contract, impacts realized from COVID-19, applicable law, and regulations, and inclusive of any relief that may be authorized by laws enacted in response to this national emergency. When reviewing requests for equitable adjustment, contracting officers are to take into account, among other factors, whether the requested costs would be allowable, allocable and reasonable to protect the health and safety of contract employees as part of the performance of the contract. Equitable adjustments to the contract or reliance on an excusable delay should not negatively affect contractor performance ratings. In response to this national emergency, on March 27, 2020, the President signed into law the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES). Most notable within the act is Section 3610, Federal Contractor Authority, which provides discretion for the agency to modify the terms and conditions of the contract to reimburse paid leave where contractor employees could not access work sites or telework but actions were needed to keep such employees in a ready state (Attachment 1). Section 3610 is included for information only. DPC will provide implementing guidance for this section as soon as practicable. The Office of Management and Budget, and many senior procurement officials of the Military Departments and Agencies have promulgated guidance similar to that in this memo regarding management of contract performance impacts due to COVID-19, many of which are available at https://www.acq.osd.mil/dpap/pacc/cc/COVID-19.html. They share the common theme that contracting officers are trusted and empowered to make the difficult decisions on appropriate adjustment to each contract. Both during and after the COVID-19 emergency, contracting officers must work closely with our industry partners to ensure continuity of operations and mission effectiveness, while protecting the continuing vitality of the DIB that is so critical to our national security.127 Research (CNR), Navy system commands, and Navy Program Executive Officers (PEOs), Subject: (Intent and Direction) Engaging the Research and Development Industrial Base during COVID-19, March 24, 2020. The article was posted at InsideDefense.com on March 26, 2020. For an article discussing this memorandum, see Justin Katz, “Geurts Urges Navy R&D to Push OTAs, Rapid Prototyping During COVID-19 Pandemic,” Inside Defense, March 26, 2020. 127 Memorandum from Office of the Under Secretary of Defense, Acquisition and Sustainment, Subject: Managing Defense Contracts Impacts of the Novel Coronavirus, undated but signed on March 30, 2020, by Kim Herrington, Acting Principal Director, Defense Pricing and Contracting. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 82 April 9 DOD Memo on Implementing Section 3610 of CARES Act On April 9, 2020, the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment issued a memorandum providing guidance for implementing Section 3610 of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act (H.R. 748/P.L. 116-136 of March 27, 2020).128 A DOD statement summarizing the memo stated: The Defense Pricing and Contracting (DPC) office has issued a class deviation to the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and the Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement (DFARS) entitled, \"CARES Act Section 3610 Implementation.\" This deviation addresses section 3610 of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act which allows agencies to reimburse contractors for payment to workers who are prevented from working due to COVID-19 facility closures or other restrictions. The deviation provides a framework for contracting officers to assess any claimed allowable costs associated with the declared public health emergency, recognizing the importance of supporting affected contractors to ensure that, together, we remain a healthy, resilient, and responsive total force. In short order, a forthcoming implementation guidance memo and Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) document will provide additional information and will be available on the Defense Pricing and Contracting website. This class deviation is the 17th new COVID-19 guidance the Department of Defense's Pricing and Contracting (DPC) office has provided to help relieve COVID-19 impacts for the Contracting Community. Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (DASD) for Industrial Policy Jennifer Santos, and Acting Principal Director, Defense Pricing and Contracting, Mr. Kim Herrington, have worked extensively with the defense industrial associations, including the small business community, to identify cost, schedule and performance impacts beyond the control of the contractor, and to provide badly needed relief to help defense industry get through this national emergency.129 Press Reports The excerpts from recent press reports below are presented in chronological order, with the most recent on top. A May 5, 2020, press report stated: A top U.S. Navy official said acquisition and sustainment could emerge stronger, having withstood disruptions during the COVID-19 crisis. Speaking May 4 as part of a Navy League webinar sponsored by IBM for small businesses in the defense industry, James F. Geurts, assistant secretary of the Navy for research, development and acquisition, said he views the pandemic as a crucible, where there will be some delays in production and maintenance, but also as an opportunity to strengthen the system. 128 Memorandum from Office of the Under Secretary of Defense, Acquisition and Sustainment, Subject: Implementation Guidance for Section 3610 of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, undated but signed on April 9, 2020, by Kim Herrington, Acting Principal Director, Defense Pricing and Contracting. See also Aaron Mehta, “Newest DoD Industry Guidance Clarifies Repayments, Makes Prototyping Easier,” Defense News, April 9, 2020. See also Vivienne Machi, “DoD to Continue Payments to Contractors Off Work Due to COVID-19,” Defense Daily, April 10, 2020. 129 DOD news release, “DOD Allows Payments to Contractors Who Cannot Work Due to COVID-19 Facility Closures or Other Restrictions,” April 9, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 83 “What new opportunities does that enable for us to leverage?” Geurts asked. “If you would have asked me four months ago, ‘Could the team go 95%-plus telework, increase contract awards 33%, do so with 10% less contracts, and at the same time get their distance learning up by 65%, I would have laughed a little bit. And we’ve [achieved those metrics] in the last seven weeks.” “I don’t see it as much as a disruption to our future plans … as an accelerant to our future plans,” Geurts added. “The goal for us is, how do we come out of this stronger than we were, and how do we work now to increase the speed by which we come out of this.” Geurts cited the late April award of the FFG(X) frigate contract to Marinette Marine three months ahead of schedule, which brought the total of Navy contract awards $25 billion ahead of the same point last fiscal year. By his recollection, this fiscal year is the first where all financial benchmarks have been exceeded. “So, I don’t view it as much as a delay as an accelerant,” he said. “We will continue to adapt as the warfighter requires. I don’t see us having to adapt our programs in a major way. We’re going to have to figure out how to capture in a bottle all the great things that have occurred in the last seven or eight weeks where we’ve gained this operational effectiveness and be thoughtful of where we’re going to have to manage risk downstream. But in terms of drastic changes to programs or schedules, I don’t see that.”130 Another May 5, 2020, press report stated: Electric Boat president Kevin Graney, who himself tested positive for COVID-19 last month but has since recovered, announced Tuesday that there are now 40 positive cases at EB. Graney also announced that in addition to EB-branded face coverings that will be provided to employees and must be worn while at work, the shipbuilder will be begin its own testing later this week.131 A May 1, 2020, press report stated: The Navy’s top acquisition official said it will take several more weeks to see the full extent of the COVID-19 pandemic disruption on shipyard work. When asked by reporters about Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment Ellen Lord’s comments on DoD expecting three months of slowdowns on major defense acquisition programs (MDAPs), James Geurts said he believes she meant there will be a range of zero to three months in delays. “I would say in the Navy we’re doing a pretty good job right now of balancing the risk and the mitigations. I do think there will be some delay and disruption but…I certainly wouldn’t characterize all MDAPs will have a three-month impact.” He added the next several weeks will be important. “It will give us more data on both the extent that the delay and disruption continues and the impact of our mitigations that we’ve been active in putting in place over the last four or five, six weeks.”… Geurts said they are also closely watching impacts on global supply chains for defense production to understand any impacts and how to manage through them while consulting with governments like Spain and Italy. “We’re watching Rota, Spain—obviously we do some ship repair work there [on four U.S. Navy destroyers that are homeported there]. And so we’re managing around that, I would not put that in the crisis mode yet,” Geurts said. He noted Italy is a source of supply parts for the [Marine Corps] amphibious combat vehicle [ACV] and has had factory shutdowns there in the past months. “Everyone’s working very aggressively to manage around it. There’s nothing I would put in a crisis 130 Richard R. Burgess, “Geurts: COVID-19 Crisis Offers Opportunity to Strengthen Acquisition, Sustainment,” Seapower, May 5, 2020. 131 Ellyn Santiago, “Electric Boat To Begin Its Own COVID-19 Employee Testing,” Patch, May 5, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 84 mode yet. We’re just keeping an eye on it. We have flexibility in many of the programs to just rephase elements of construction or use stock we have on hand.”132 An April 30, 2020, press report stated: The Defense Department’s top acquisition official said the department is working closely with the industrial base to mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic but said there is the potential for a three-month slowdown in procurement and sustainment. “We continue to assess the impact of a potential three-month slowdown to many programs due to COVID-19,” said Ellen M. Lord, deputy secretary of defense for acquisition and sustainment, speaking April 30 at the Pentagon to reporters. “I intentionally used the word slowdown and impact and not saying the word ‘delay,’ which carries a very different connotation,” Lord added. “We have seen inefficiencies across many programs. COVID-19 is temporarily shutting down defense manufacturing facilities and production lines, disrupting supply chains and distressing the financial stability of the companies DoD relies on to protect the nation. DoD continues to partner with industry to do everything possible to keep programs on schedule and to minimize the cost and schedule impacts.” Lord praised the work of the Defense Contracting Management Agency (DCMA) and Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) in tracking the status of companies up and down the defense supply chain. “Out of the 10,509 companies DCMA tracks, 93 are closed, down 13 from last week, with 141 companies having closed and reopened, up very significantly 73 from last week’s number of 68,” she said. “This is the first time we have seen reopening numbers larger than the number of closures. “Out of the 11,413 companies DLA tracks, 437 are closed with 237 having closed and re-opened, almost 100 companies from last week.” Lord noted that “while we have seen minor improvements, we continue to see the greatest impacts in the aviation supply chain, shipbuilding and small space launch [companies].” Lord said her office’s policy team led by Jen Santos is “leading multiple industry calls making calls every week with 18 industrial associations.” “Tim Harrington, director of Defense Pricing and Contracting, has issued 22 defense pricing and cost memos, aggressively responding to industry needs and impacts. The memos include guidance for increased telecommuting, increased progress payment rates, acquisition timeline impacts, reimbursement for those prevented from working, and more,” she said.133 Another April 30, 2020, press report stated: Newport News Shipbuilding is moving from three shifts to two shifts beginning Monday [May 4], with a three-hour period in between to allow cleaning of high-touch surfaces, President Jennifer Boykin announced Thursday during a virtual news conference. As another response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the company will also begin taking the temperatures of everyone entering the shipyard beginning Friday [May 1]. Currently, most workers are on the first shift, and significantly fewer are on second and third shifts, Boykin said, so the change Monday will mean more people will work the 132 Defense Daily News staff, “Defense Watch: COVID Delays, DDG-1002, SASC Hearings, OPC,” Defense Daily, May 1, 2020. 133 Richard R. Burgess, “DoD’s Lord: Potential for 3-Month Slowdown in Defense Acquisition,” Seapower, April l3, 2020. See also Pat Host, “Covid-19: More US Defence Contractors Re-open than Close for First Time Since Virus Struck,” Jane’s, May 2, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 85 second shift, reducing the number of workers on first shift and allowing for better social distancing. Thirty-five employees out of the company’s 25,000-person workforce have tested positive for COVID-19 since March 23, and everyone entering the shipyard is required to wear a mask. Screeners will be posted at each of the shipyard’s seven open gates, taking temperatures with infrared, non-contact temperature readers, Boykin added. If anyone has a temperature 100 degrees or higher, they will undergo a secondary temperature screening. Anyone who tests twice for a temperature of 100 degrees or higher will be sent home.134 An April 29, 2020, press report stated: Bath Iron Works is calling workers to resume normal attendance starting Monday, May 11, after a large number of workers took extended time off due to coronavirus. Leaders of International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers Local S6, BIW’s largest union, said they have more questions than answers because the union was not told of BIW’s decision before it was sent to employees. “We believe we should’ve had a seat at the table when discussing the safety of the employees,” said Chris Wiers, president of Local S6. “We have not been afforded that, so now we’re in the same position that everyone else is in. We’re just asking questions because there are a tremendous amount of unknowns.”… In a Wednesday [April 29] notice to employees, BIW listed four options its employees can choose from: Return to work, request an alternative shift assignment, use unused paid time off or request a leave of absence for a minimum of 30 calendar days, up to 90 calendar days. The employees will have to take one of those options by Monday, May 11. The notice states a leave of absence will be granted to employees who have, or live with a family member who has, a medical condition that puts them in the coronavirus “high-risk” category as defined by the Centers for Disease Control. Employees also can apply for leave if they’re caring for a child or if there are “circumstances beyond the employee’s control which will prevent their ability to report to work due to the COVID-19 pandemic.”… The company said its demand for employees to return to work is attached to Gov. Janet Mills’ four-stage plan to reopen Maine’s businesses and public spaces.… The shipyard’s decision to remain open was repeatedly rebuked by Maine lawmakers and union leaders alike.… Despite remaining open, BIW offered employees extended unpaid leave, and about 60 percent of workers did not clock in after two employees tested positive for the virus in late March and early April. The shipyard confirmed both workers have since recovered and returned to work as of April 23. No other employees have tested positive. David Hench, BIW spokesman, said the shipyard is still seeing 25% to 30% under normal attendance as of Thursday, April 30. Wiers said only 45% of Local S6 union members have come into work over the last four weeks. Despite no new positive cases of coronavirus from within the shipyard, BIW continues to encourage workers to wear face coverings while working, but it isn’t mandatory. The 134 Kate Andrews, “Newport News Shipbuilding Moving from Three to Two Shifts,” Virginia Business, April 30, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 86 shipyard has distributed 7,500 face coverings to employees according to an April 26 news release. On April 24 the company announced it mailed disposable thermometers to employees for checking their temperature each day before coming into work. On the company website, BIW said this is “a voluntary effort, but it is an important part of the most current guidelines available and participation is strongly encouraged to keep employees safe.”135 Another April 29, 2020, press report stated: General Dynamics Electric Boat remains ready to start construction of the first Columbia-class ballistic missile submarine in October, company officials announced Wednesday [April 29]. To date, Electric Boat’s preparations to start building the first of 12 planned Columbia-class boomers, along with work at the yard building the Virginia-class fast attack submarines, has not experienced significant delays due to COVID-19, Phebe Novakovic, the chief executive of General Dynamics, told analysts during a Wednesday conference discussing the company’s first-quarter financial results. “The performance was good and particularly solid at Electric Boat,” Novakovic said. “We’ve also increased our advanced construction on the first Columbia as we approach the planned construction date in October of this year.”… Now, as companies take measures to protect their workforces from catching and spreading COVID-19, Novakovic said the company is working to limit supply chain disruptions and work slowdowns. General Dynamics has pushed roughly $300 million to prop up its suppliers while they deal with business disruptions caused by COVID-19. “Since the onset of the COVID-19 crisis, we have supported our government customers and implemented multiple safety measures to keep our people as safe as possible,” Novakovic said in a statement released before markets opened Wednesday. “We are responding to the COVID travel restrictions’ impact on Gulfstream and are managing our costs throughout our business.”136 An April 28, 2020, press report stated: The U.S. Navy has paid defense contractors $600 million it had withheld to ensure contract performance, hoping the funds would shore up finances for suppliers ravaged by the coronavirus-driven economic downturn, a Navy official said on Tuesday [April 28]. The move, which follows a similar action taken by the Air Force that released billions of dollars in payments, is aimed at replacing revenue vital Pentagon suppliers have lost in their non-military businesses as the spreading coronavirus has halted business activity nationwide. “We were immediately able to infuse about $600 million of funds that we had on withholds,” James Geurts, the assistant secretary of the Navy for research, development and acquisition, told reporters on a conference call. A Navy spokesperson said “for example, with the ship repair industry, withholds were reduced to one percent.” The Navy was unable to say whether a portion of the $600 million was withheld due to poor contractor performance.… 135 Kathleen O’Brien, “BIW Calls Employees Back to Work as State Begins to Rreopen,” Portland (ME) Press Herald, April 29 (updated April 30), 2020. See also Christopher Burns, “Bath Iron Works Calls Workers Back to the Shipyard,” Bangor (ME) Daily News, May 1, 2020. 136 Ben Werner, “Pandemic Isn’t Slowing Down Columbia-Class Submarine Construction,” USNI News, April 29, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 87 Government waste watch-dogs criticized the move. “This current emergency shouldn’t be an excuse to avoid accountability for poor performance that predated this outbreak,” said Mandy Smithberger, of the Project On Government Oversight in Washington. Earlier this month, Geurts said he had authorized “hundreds of millions” of dollars to be paid out to top suppliers like General Dynamics (GD.N) and Huntington Ingalls Industries (HII.N) which could flow to the supply chain. Representatives from Huntington Ingalls and General Dynamics said the Navy was not withholding money from them for poor performance. While the Navy did not name any companies that received payments, industry sources have said the biggest contractors have been filtering coronavirus-related funds to their suppliers and subcontractors who, because of their smaller size, are on much shakier financial footing.137 Another April 28, 2020, press report stated: Navy leaders and defense industry execs are worried about the effect the COVID-19 pandemic is having on their supply chains, potentially interrupting critical repair and refit availabilities that could have knock-on effects on deployment schedules. The Navy’s acquisition chief James Geurts told reporters recently that so far, industry is “holding pretty good on near-term milestones,” but he’s worried about long-term effects on ship repair and the industry’s ability to keep pace. However, the pandemic seems to be having some beneficial effects. “Part of my goal for our team is not to recover necessarily to where we were,” before COVID-19, but to change some fundamentals of how the Navy’s business gets done, he said. With most of the Navy acquisition force teleworking, “we’re basically 32 percent ahead on contract awards,” of where they planned to be at this point in the year. “And so, that means there are processes that are working much more efficiently now than they were before, so I want to capture those,” he said. The Navy and shipbuilders are trying to do the same thing in the shipyards where “maybe different techniques will allow us to gain some efficiency while also creating some resiliency,” that will help weather any future disruptions and setbacks. The big shipbuilders like Huntington Ingalls and Bath Iron Works are staggering shifts and allowing liberal leave and teleworking without suffering much disruption so far, company officials have said. Geurts said the lessons they’re learning could lead to the conclusion that, “we cannot operate the way we used to operate, which had a lot of fragility and brittleness as we’re seeing right now. It’s got to drive to the way we need to operate in the future, which has to have resiliency for whatever disruption that might come up. That’s what we’re really trying to watch closely and think two or three phases ahead, and not just get caught up in managing today’s crisis.”… In the end, “we’ve got to manage our way through delay and disruption, but really focus on steepening the recovery and reinvention phase to get into the place we need to be,” Geurts said. “I think there are ways we can come out of this much more resilient, but you 137 Mike Stone, “U.S. Navy Pays Contractors $600 Million Held Back to Ensure Performance,” Reuters, April 28, 2020. See also Justin Katz, “Geurts: Navy ‘Infused’ $600M to Shipbuilding Base in Response to COVID-19,” Inside Defense, April 28, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 88 know it’s hard to change bureaucracy and institutional ways of doing business [to] make sure that this disruption doesn’t go to waste.”138 Another April 28, 2020, press report stated: It’s still too early to say if the COVID-19-related economic slowdown is significantly disrupting the production of major programs, the Navy’s top weapons-buyer said during a media call Tuesday [April 28]. At the shipyards, the near-term priority work is on track. However, the Navy is still watching how COVID-19-related restrictions and supply-chain problems are disrupting the mid- and long-term work, James Geurts, the assistant secretary of the Navy for research, development and acquisition, said Tuesday. Asked about continuing operations while the virus hits or threatens shipyards and manufacturers, Geurts said, “we are seeing less [disruption] than in the first couple weeks, but we are still learning and studying hard what the potential downstream impacts could be.” He added the Navy and its industry partners were only about five weeks into the pandemic and so it would be hard to draw any larger conclusions yet about impacts to specific programs or sectors.… The best-case scenario is zero infections, Geurts said. But the reality is everyone—the Navy and its contractors—recognize COVID-19 is present and must focus on understanding how to operate within the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines while also accomplishing the mission…. “We have, I can say we have about 10 times as many people working remotely today as we did six weeks ago,” Mike Petters, HII’s chief executive, said during the shipbuilder’s virtual annual meeting Tuesday morning. Roughly 10,000 employees are now teleworking, Beci Brenton, a Huntington Ingalls Industries spokeswoman, told USNI News after the meeting.… Throughout the industry, shipyards are increasing their screening efforts, including checking employees every day using temperature readers, Geurts said. Workers with fevers are told to stay home or directed to seek medical attention. Companies are also adjusting how workers enter yards so temperatures can be taken remotely without too many people queueing up together. Ingalls Shipbuilding just started temperature checks as workers arrived. Anyone with a temperature of 100.5 or higher is directed to get a recheck. If the second check is still 100.5 or higher, the employee is sent to get a COVID-19 test and quarantine as necessary. Newport News Shipbuilding will start a similar process next week, Brenton said. “My sense right now is it is stabilizing and we are learning how to operate more and more efficiently in the midst of [the disease], as opposed to strictly trying to avoid having any infections,” Geurts said.139 An April 27, 2020, press report stated: The Pentagon is bracing for a possible three-month delay across its major acquisition programs because of the COVID-19 outbreak.… [DOD acquisition chief Ellen] Lord, citing statistics from the Defense Contract Management Agency, said out of 10,509 \"major prime companies,\" 106 are closed, with 138 Paul McCleary, “Navy Acquisition Boosts Ship Contract Awards Under COVID-19,” Breaking Defense, April 28, 2020. See also Lee Hudson, “COVID-19 Alters DOD View Of Supply Chain,” Aviation Week, April 28, 2020. 139 Ben Werner and Megan Eckstein, “Shipyards Continue to Balance COVID-19 Mitigation With Efficient Operations,” USNI News, April 28, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 89 68 companies having closed and reopened. Out of 11,413 “vendor-based companies,” she said 427 are closed, with 147 having closed and reopened. “Domestically, we are seeing the greatest impacts in the aviation supply chain, shipbuilding and small space launch,” she said. “So right now there isn't any specific COVID penalty that we see for a specific program; however, we do anticipate about a three-month slowdown.” Defense contractors will not be penalized for delays related to COVID-19, however, and can ask the government to be reimbursed for any costs incurred. Lord said she expects that bail-out effort to cost “billions and billions.”140 An April 20, 2020, press report stated: The shipbuilding, aviation and small space launch sectors are the three hardest-hit by the COVID-19 pandemic within the defense industrial base, according to the under secretary of defense for acquisition and sustainment, despite a slew of memos and authorities signed out by the Pentagon to relieve pressure from sick workers and facilities closures. “We see a slowdown in the shipyards to an extent. Aviation is actually the most highly impacted sector we have right now. So the 20 different memos that Kim Herrington (director of defense pricing and contracting) put out are really to make sure our cash flows and we quickly get on contract so we can keep going,” Ellen Lord told reporters on a Monday [April 20] morning news conference. She said her team is still in the process of going program by program and understanding what production milestones may be at risk due to pandemic-related disruptions – everything from work slowing down on assembly lines to allow for social distancing, to coping with a smaller workforce as some employees are sick or taking leave to care for children at home, to breaks in the supply chain as component suppliers struggle to keep on schedule. For now, Lord said she could not point to any specific programs or any specific milestones most at risk, but she said major defense acquisition programs as a whole will face about a three-month slowdown due to COVID-19. To try to stay ahead of the spreading disease, “we follow very carefully where the highest number of cases are throughout the country and we look at the defense industrial base, where they are located, so we try to anticipate the problems and work with the companies to keep going to the greatest degree possible” and work with companies in emerging hot spots to put mitigation measures in place before their workforces are hit…. Without naming companies or sectors, Lord said in her opening remarks that, of 10,509 major prime contractors, 106 are currently closed and 68 have closed and already reopened. On the vendor side, out of 11,413 companies, 427 are closed, with another 147 having closed and reopened. Though the Pentagon can’t help companies having to close because the workforce is sick, leaders can ensure that companies with healthy workers aren’t left without work and waiting for contracts to be signed. The Navy and DoD have accelerated contract awards and urged prime contractors to quickly push work down to their suppliers of all sizes, so that as soon as a company is ready for new work, the work is awarded and money already paid.141 An April 16, 2020, press report stated: 140 Tony Bertuca, “DOD Monitors Industrial Base as Congress Eyes Another Massive COVID-19 Aid Package,” Inside Defense, April 27, 2020. 141 Megan Eckstein, “DoD: Shipbuilding, Aviation Hardest-Hit Sectors in Defense Industrial Base by COVID Pandemic,” USNI News, April 20, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 90 The Navy’s acquisition community is trying to “leverage the condition we’re in, not be a victim of it,” with the service’s top buyer saying he’s confident his workforce can take unexpected lessons learned adjusting to the COVID-19 pandemic and actually be more efficient in the long term. Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development and Acquisition James Geurts said the Navy this fiscal year has already awarded $88.52 billion in acquisition contracts, compared to $66.3 billion at the same time last year—a 32-percent acceleration in awarding work, and with 5 percent fewer contracting actions. He said this is also happening while more than 95 percent of his staff is teleworking. On the research side of the portfolio, the Office of Naval Research (ONR) has obligated $1.5 billion in work compared to the planned $1.029 billion at this point in the year. The reason for rushing to get so much work on contract is to get as big a backlog as possible in place for not just prime contractors but for suppliers of all sizes around the country—so that as the coronavirus hits different geographies at different times, any companies affected by the disease will have plenty of work to come back to when the workforce is able to continue working. Geurts first told reporters about this effort last month, saying the last thing he wanted was a company with healthy workers and no work on contract to perform. Though the reason for speeding up contract awards is for the defense industrial base, Geurts told reporters today that “we’ve got to manage our way through delay and disruption, but really focus on steepening the recovery and reinvention phase to get us to the place we need to be.… I think there are ways we can come out of this in a much more resilient, much higher efficiency manner than where we were. We were doing some great things previously, but it’s hard to change bureaucracy and institutional ways of doing business. The team has really adapted quickly, we need to capture that and make sure this disruption doesn’t go to waste.” Getting “back to normal” isn’t his goal anymore, he said; rather, he believes the workforce can “get us to a future end state where we are in a better position than we were pre-crisis.” For example, Geurts said, the Navy may have lost out on accessing a lot of talented workers in the past because those people were not willing to move for a new job to work out of the Pentagon, Washington Navy Yard, or other locations. The Navy did not trust the available teleworking options, and so those potential employees went unhired. Now, with teleworking proving to be as efficient or even more so, Geurts suggested that the service could tap into even larger talent pools going forward if it were willing to continue telework practices even once the pandemic passes. Additionally, he said, the Navy is being forced to rely on remote training, remote technology assistance and remove installation assistance options right now, where typically the service would choose to fly a team of experts from a center of excellence to the location of need in the fleet. Travel restrictions “caused us to reinvent to a large degree how we do some of that and recreate resiliency and self-sufficiency at the ship level and at the individual base level and at, quite frankly, the individual level, the person level.” The Navy has already begun researching and testing tele-maintenance options and other related efforts, but the pandemic and the related work and travel restrictions may be a forcing function to embrace those technologies faster and more wide-spread than a big institution may have been inclined to do. Though the next crisis might look different than today’s novel virus, Geurts said there will always be a next crisis ahead. “Our sight picture cannot be the way we used to operate, which had a lot of fragility and brittleness to it, as we’re seeing right now. It’s got to drive to the way we need to operate in the future, which has to have resiliency for whatever disruption might come up,” he said.… Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 91 Where money has already been appropriated for programs in the current Fiscal Year 2020 budget, Geurts said the program offices are just awarding contracts early where possible. In other cases where money isn’t programmed but opportunities exist to get ahead and keep industry stable, the Navy is either seeking creative business models or procurement methods or will be in talks with the administration as future stimulus packages are put together, pitching these ideas as ways to keep workers working while also increasing military readiness. On the research side of the portfolio, Geurts acknowledged that some work—particularly that done in academia, where universities are closed and student and faculty researchers dispersed—will fall behind schedule. The Navy has about 2,000 performers of basic and early research, and ONR is reaching out to each individually and “understanding their ability to get the work done, any modifications they have to make, anything we need to do on our end to try to accommodate that. We’re about 50 percent through that, we hope to finish that here in the next week or so. And so what I would say is, the performance on the grants and contracts are proceeding reasonably well; generally, those who don’t have access to labs or facilities are working on analyzing data, writing reports, doing test planning and whatnot. There are some that do have to modify their work plan, and for those we’re working with them to give them no-cost extensions so that they’re not penalized due to this disruption.” “On the flip side, we’re also understanding where there’s opportunity to accelerate work. And maybe if there’s a performer doing [Small Business Innovation Research] work and they’re ready to move and we can double down on that work, we’ll look to accelerate things. So I think we’re looking for opportunities wherever they are – not necessarily just managing downside risk, we’re also taking advantage of upside opportunity.”142 An April 15, 2020, press report stated: A new shift schedule was released Wednesday [April 15] for Huntington Ingalls Industries shipbuilders in Newport News in light of recent coronavirus updates. According to a release, the shipbuilding division will shift to the new schedule starting Monday, May 4. The new normal for workers will be either a 6 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. shift, or a 6 p.m. to 2:30 a.m. shift. The changes aim to encourage social distancing among workers and give more time for cleaning busy areas. Newport News Shipbuilding is currently reporting 23 total confirmed cases of COVID-19 involving shipyard workers as of April 15. The changes will impact production workers and employees directly supporting production and providing waterfront support services. Examples of those employees include those who work in waterfront engineering, production control, the clinic, and construction project and inspection departments.143 An April 10, 2020, press report stated: 142 Megan Eckstein, “Geurts: Navy Acquisition ‘Managing Downside Risk,’ Seeking ‘Upside Opportunity,’” USNI News, April 16, 2020. See also Richard R. Burgess, “Geurts: Accelerated Acquisitions Position Navy, Industry for Period After COVID-19 Crisis Wanes,” Seapower, April 15, 2020; Mallory Shelbourne, “NAVSEA Stands Up ‘Rapid Action Team’ to Apply New Technology During COVID-19 Crisis,” Inside Defense, April 16, 2020. 143 WAVY, “Newport News Shipbuilding Announces New Shift Schedule to Increase Social Distancing Efforts,” WAVY.com, April 15, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 92 As the coronavirus count continues to rise, management [at Newport News Shipbuilding] has launched an all-hands effort that calls for the safe distancing of 6 feet and the use of masks when closer than six feet. A machinist at the shipyard, who does not want to be identified, says 6-foot distancing is unrealistic when you consider actual distances when building machines of war. He told WAVY News 10 he often works 2 to 3 feet away from coworkers on job sites. He says the region needs to prepare for an illness that will affect shipyard workers, contractors, members of the military and families. “The sickness could spread to their families and their children, their loved ones and whoever else that they are taking care of, so this is going to be catastrophic pretty soon,” said the machinist. As of Thursday [April 9] afternoon, there were 20 reported cases of COVID-19 at the shipyard. Steelworkers Union President Charles Spivey hears similar concerns from all corners of the yard. He believes construction deadlines should be set aside and the gates of the state’s largest industrial employer should be closed before it’s too late. “They have shut down schools, they have shut down barbershops — churches, one that I’m a pastor of — and yet they expect the people here at Newport News Shipbuilding, management and salary, to deliver a vessel,” said Spivey. The machinist is also concerned the virus will take a heavy toll on African Americans in the yard and their families. “This is actually going to be catastrophic because you have a large percentage there that are older so if they have underlying health conditions and they’re African American they are going to die or get sick,” according to the contract employee.144 Another April 10, 2020, press report stated: As COVID-19 has come to dominate our waking moments in 2020, traveling across the oceans and now creeping through our communities, Norfolk Naval Shipyard (NNSY) [a government-operated shipyard that overhauls, maintains, and repairs nuclear-powered Navy ships] has been finding ways to continue achieving its critical mission while simultaneously working to ensure employee safety and health…. … NNSY is continuing to conduct all service to the Fleet at its main location in Portsmouth [VA]. Currently on the Portsmouth waterfront, NNSY has three vital projects that will greatly assist the Navy in three different but highly important ways. That includes USS George H.W. Bush’s (CVN 77) most extensive work since commissioning, in the form of a Drydocking Planned Incremental Availability; USS Wyoming (SSBN 742), which is a critical piece in the country’s nuclear deterrence strategy, getting an Engineered Refueling Overhaul; and USS San Francisco (SSN 711), which is undergoing conversion to become a next-generation Moored Training Ship ensuring highly skilled and fully capable 21st century fleet operators. The shipyard also continues to conduct mission-critical work at all its satellite locations and assisting other sites as part of the nation’s One Shipyard Concept. In the past couple weeks just in Hampton Roads, recent NNSY accomplishments at Naval Station Norfolk included completing work on USS Wasp (LHD 1), successfully conducting testing on USS 144 Regina Mobley, “Machinist Says Social Distancing Among Employees at Newport News Shipbuilding Is Unrealistic,” WAVY.com, April 10, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 93 New Mexico (SSN 779), and assisting work on USS Gerald Ford (CVN 78) and USS John Warner (SSN 785); and at Huntington Ingalls-Newport News Shipbuilding, restoring systems to remove cofferdams on USS Boise (SSN 764).… The inherent challenges working to minimize spread of COVID-19 while needing ship project team members to work in relative close proximity to one another is being addressed on several fronts at NNSY. These are in addition to all the Department of Defense-mandated ways to prevent and minimize COVID-19 spread. One shipyard-specific action is NNSY’s Supply Department (Code 500) taking the lead in assembling and distributing cleaning kits to the projects. These contain paper towels, gloves, and sanitizers for cleaning high touch areas and objects such as common areas and conference rooms, and doorknobs and elevator buttons. The shipyard is also preparing to implement screening procedures at the gates to curb the possibility of a person with COVID-19 entering the installation. Additionally, NNSY’s Naval Facilities (NAVFAC) Public Works Department-Portsmouth has confirmed with its custodial contractor that cleaning products used at NNSY are effective at killing COVID-19. To maximize social distancing, NNSY has suspended large gatherings and meetings such as Force Multiplier trainings, monthly safety flag presentations and Employee Resource Group meetings. In their place, Shipyard Cmdr. Capt. Kai Torkelson has been filming ongoing messages for these groups as coordinated by the shipyard’s Public Affairs Office (Code 1160) and Shipyard Instruction Design Center (Code 1170). NNSY’s Public Affairs Office has also been releasing daily updates to the workforce, posting constant updates to the command Facebook page, and establishing a repository of important COVID-19 information on NNSY WebCentral. Capt. Torkelson has also been providing continual updates and messages of encouragement to the workforce.145 Another April 10, 2020, press report stated: The priorities of minimizing the spread while maximizing the mission do not need to be in conflict with one another at Norfolk Naval Shipyard (NNSY). “So by minimize spread, you’ll be adhering to the six feet social distancing rules, supplying gloves and masks, as well as thoroughly cleaning all surfaces? If not, then you are not minimizing spread, you are part of the problem by continuing to spread the virus,” wrote one person on NNSY’s Facebook page April 2. NNSY leadership is working to demonstrate all of those protective actions are being performed in America’s Shipyard, along with many more to safeguard the health and safety of the workforce during the national emergency caused by COVID-19. Recent initiatives on the shipyard waterfront include implementing facemasks and face shields on jobs requiring multiple people, establishing several designated cleaning times throughout the day, more effectively fanning out the workforce across all three shifts, and installing handwashing stations at the piers and dry docks. “These important actions show employee safety, health and well-being are our top priority while we continue to meet the mission,” said NNSY Operations Officer, Capt. Jip Mosman. “Not only will multiple shifts help with social distancing, they also provide flexibility to some of our shipyard parents while their children are out of school. Dedicated cleaning crews, along with every one of us cleaning as we go throughout the day, no matter what shift we are on or where we are located, will help prevent the spread of COVID-19 inside the shipyard. We must all work as a team to keep our shipyard virus free.” Shipyard leadership and project teams have reengineered jobs whenever possible to practice social distancing while still conducting critical work. In the cases that is not 145 Michael Brayshaw, “Minimizing the Spread, Maximizing the Mission: Norfolk Naval Shipyard Continues Service to the Fleet During COVID-19 Pandemic,” Navy News Service, April 10, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 94 feasible and employees are within six feet of each other for prolonged periods, face masks and face shields will be used. COVID-19 specific Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) has been distributed to NNSY’s USS George H.W. Bush (CVN 77), USS Wyoming (SSBN 742) and USS San Francisco (SSN 701) projects, with personnel being briefed on effective usage. Protecting the safety and health of shipyard project teams on the piers and dry docks is further benefitted by several new handwashing stations with foot pump faucets along the waterfront. Per guidance from the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention, handwashing is more effective than using hand sanitizer, which prompted attaining and installing these stations in close proximity to brows and project trailers. These stations will be serviced several times a week to replenish water, soap, and paper towels. John Schmeckenbecher, NNSY Port Operations Installation program director, said the handwashing stations are strategically located next to the projects and are similar to ones found at a carnival. “They don’t take up much space, they are standalone and don’t take any power,” he said. “We put them where they are convenient for people to use.” Random Health Measures have also begun at the shipyard, with ongoing spot checks throughout the installation where qualified personnel take employee temperatures and ask questions to ensure workforce members are not currently exhibiting any COVID-19 symptoms. Naval Facilities, Public Works Department Portsmouth, is currently coordinating expanded cleaning services at NNSY to include treating high-touch objects and locations with cleaning products effective at killing COVID-19. These are the latest in continued efforts safeguarding employee safety and health, a movement that began in March with NNSY assembling and distributing cleaning kits and producing hand sanitizer for the workforce so cleaning products would be readily available. “During this challenging time, shipyard leadership is doing everything in its power to ensure a safe work environment, protecting the safety and health of our coworkers, Ship’s Force, and all those within America’s Shipyard,” said Shipyard Cmdr. Capt. Kai Torkelson. “This is just the start, and there are more steps to come. It’s not going to be a sprint, it’s going to be a marathon, and we have to keep up that endurance.”146 Another April 10, 2020, press report stated that NNSY has put together a team to develop, manufacture and distribute cleaning and disinfecting kits to all its shops and codes. “Even though we have had no positive cases here at NNSY, we wanted to stay ahead of the curve,” said Production Specialist Chris Hicks of the NNSY’s recently re-establish Supply Department (Code 510.2). “For the health of the workforce, it is always better to be proactive than reactive.”147 An April 7, 2020, press report stated: Newport News Shipbuilding officials say their employees at their Virginia shipyard have found interesting ways to keep with the spirit of social distancing while also keeping their shipbuilding programs on schedule. “Many of the jobs are one-man jobs, and six feet of social distancing is relatively easy to obtain. An aircraft carrier is a pretty big ship, and to spread a couple thousand people out on that, believe it or not, is not as hard as you would think. But there will always be jobs 146 Norfolk Naval Shipyard Public Affairs, “Norfolk Naval Shipyard Works to Safeguard Employee Safety, Health During COVID-19 Pandemic,” Navy News Service, April 10, 2020. 147 Troy Miller, “Team Effort Arms Norfolk Naval Shipyard for Fight Against the Coronavirus,” Navy News Service, April 10, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 95 that will require individuals to do two-man jobs, and when we get to that point we have to think about the job differently,” Lucas Hicks, vice president of new construction aircraft carrier programs, told USNI News in an interview last week. “When you can’t spread out, can you re-engineer your workspace? Sometimes it’s nothing more than enlarging a work platform; where my staging was very small, can I make my staging a little bit larger? Or if I had a containment to keep the component clean, could I make the containment a little bit larger? Could I use a tool extension? Could I use a GoPro with all the right security considerations to allow an inspector to see what I’m seeing real-time but from a distance of more than six feet away?” Dru Branche, the shipyard’s director of environmental, health and safety, said during the interview. “And when you can’t spread out, then you want to kind of practice some form of shielding, and can you do that with gloves, with clear face shields? … Can you use a sheet metal or a Lucite (clear acrylic) or a Herculite (fabric) barrier between you and your coworkers that allows you to stop the spread of those respirable droplets that are what really cause the disease to spread?” Branche said the company has a liberal leave policy in place and that some people have already moved from the day shift to the night shift, which allows for better spacing in construction areas and in office buildings. Several thousands of employees are also teleworking full time or a couple days a week, further thinning out the volume of people moving around common areas of the shipyard each day. On Tuesday [April 7], the shipyard reported 14 cases of COVID-19. Jennifer Boykin, president of Newport News Shipbuilding, told local news outlets the yard is recommending employees wear cloth masks in line with CDC guidance. Hicks said the guidance health officials have given to the yard is to keep people six feet apart, and to limit time near one another to 15 minutes. To achieve that, the workers are pulling tools out of the toolshed that allows them to work at greater distances. For example, many tools, such as grinders, have extenders that allow workers to access hard-to-reach spots on a ship. “In normal circumstances, we would not employ such a device, but these are not normal circumstances. So we are looking at using existing tooling that gives us separation that we normally wouldn’t use in that application, but because we have them and can use them, we’ll apply them now in a different situation than we originally anticipated,” Hicks said. He added that workers are being asked to be mindful of their jobs and consider alternate ways to carry them out. For example, if two people are required because one person is performing a task and the other has to inspect at each step along the way, the yard has determined that the two workers likely don’t need to be in a small space at the same time. Though it may slow down the work a bit, they’ve moved to one employee being in the space to perform a task and then stepping out before the inspector steps in. Hicks noted an example from recent days, where three workers were supposed to be in a tent together, with the third person simply there for oversight. “They said, well why don’t you cut a window in the tent so they could stand outside the tent? So they put a clear window in it,” Hicks said. In select cases, the company is even allowing inspections to be done with the aid of GoPros and other camera gear. “We are conservative in that approach, so if we believe it is a gray area then we’re going to do the hands-on visual” inspection, Hicks stressed. “But if it is second-party verification that … an instrument may be taking a temperature reading or a pressure reading and [we need] second-party verification of that, the first party Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 96 standing there doing it, the second party can do that effectively with a video assistant. No different. Now if it’s a five-times visual inspection of a weld, we wouldn’t do that with a video device, we would do that with eyes because we couldn’t ensure the magnification of the video device and things like that. So some of it we can and some of it we cannot.” When there are no tools or workarounds to keep two people more than six feet apart, “where absolutely positively we can’t get around it, we one, either stop the job and look for a window downstream to go do it – now, not knowing where the window is, looking downstream, is this a critical path job, is this not a critical path job, can we push this a few months from now and still meet our objectives? Some of the time that happens naturally. Some of the time is, no, let’s put a respirator on and let’s go work this with proper controls, engineered controls,” Hicks said. In these cases, the workers are outfitted with respirators, face shields, gloves, and other personal gear to keep them from picking up or spreading germs. Hicks said most employees already have gloves and face shields as part of their standard tool package, used during tasks like grinding or sanding or other routine work. Not everyone has a respirator, since they have to be fit to the individual, but Newport News Shipbuilding has enough in its storage to take care of its workers in the event that workarounds are not possible and they need to be in close proximity to another colleague. In fact, Hicks said of the respirators, “we stock and we have a good supplier and so on and so forth, to the point that we’ve leaned in and helped out with our local hospitals to get them some of the necessary supplies that we would have had on stock.” He said the yard also has a lot of Herculite tent material and clear Lucite that can be used for shielding, so there haven’t been many big spends on gear to keep workers safe. Hicks said the company has about 25,000 employees and that somewhere between 16,000 and 18,000 need to be in person at the yard. To further spread out those people who need to remain at the yard for work, the company is trying to rebalance when work gets done. The yard typically runs a primary day shift and a much smaller back shift; Hicks said the company is trying to even out those numbers both to help out employees who may have children at home during the day now and to achieve the social distancing that health officials recommend. “We are permitted to send entire crews to another shift by our collective bargaining agreement. But that’s not our intent. That’s just not our intention, we’re really trying to come through how to go enact this in the right manner. There’s a people piece of this that says, should you really go force someone onto the back shift? There’s also a people piece of this that says, in order to increase social distancing, we need to force people into the back shift. And we’re trying to come through what is the right way to deal with that,” Hicks said. He said he hopes they can achieve the right numbers voluntarily, but if they cannot get to the right people per square foot numbers they yard needs, then they may start ordering additional crews or individuals to alter their work hours. Asked how long this beefed-up back shift will last, Hicks said it was hard to say at this point. The yard has been in touch with its sister yard, Ingalls Shipbuilding in Mississippi, as well as the General Dynamics Electric Boat yard in Connecticut that it partners with for submarine construction, to share ideas and best practices. Hicks said the yard has modeled every scenario of how long this pandemic could last and how quickly the yard could resume its normal work hours, even modeling what it would look like to shut down altogether or to cease certain activities altogether. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 97 “We’ve run every scenario. We have them all on the shelf ready to pull the trigger if we have to. We’re just not there,” in terms of committing to any particular scenario, though, Hicks said. With so many unknowns, Hicks said it’s also hard to guess what the schedule or cost impacts may be to the submarine and aircraft carrier construction programs taking place at Newport News Shipbuilding today. “I think it’s too early to think we have any schedule adjustments to make. Again, not knowing what tomorrow is, but it’s too early to think we have any schedule adjustments to make yet. Not to say we won’t. But we also are working with the various [Program Executive Offices] – I was on the phone with [PEO Carriers Rear Adm. Jim] Downey today, to make sure his priorities and my priorities are aligned and that I understand what the most important ship is, relative to aircraft carrier construction, for him. I know that my counterparts on the [Virginia-Class Submarine] team are doing the same with the submarine PEO … and all the way up to [Vice Adm. Tom] Moore at [Naval Sea Systems Command].” Hicks said constant communication between the yard and its customers will ensure that available workers are put on the right projects, and that if something has to be sacrificed it’s volume work and not critical path work that more directly determines a ship’s delivery schedule. Once the workforce is back at 100 percent, he said, they can look at overtime and other options to make up volume work as needed. The shipyard happened to be in the midst of a digitization effort, with the future aircraft carrier Enterprise set to be the first ship built from fully digital plans instead of paper drawings. This effort has actually made mass teleworking go smoother than expected in a lot of ways, Hicks said. “We are much better prepared than I think many of our peers may be” because of moves the company has made in recent years. The company already has 11,000 laptops deployed and bought 500 more to support teleworking employees. Designers, engineers and planners can work from home full-time because of the digital ship plans. Others, like financial analysts, have been able to divide into a blue/gold teaming model so they’re at work half the time and crunching numbers at home half the time, Hicks added. Though the company has had some bandwidth limitations, and it realized early on it didn’t have enough phone lines, Hicks said they’re working through any challenges they encounter but are overall “in a much better spot” as a result of the move to digital. In fact, other than cleaning supplies, the additional laptops and network bandwidth have been the only real spending items for the company to support the yard’s pandemic response. Branche said the shipyard had bought a range of products, from cleaners to aerosols to fogs, to disinfect all kinds of work spaces…. Branche said it was hard to say how much more often spaces were being cleaned compared to usual, mostly because the employees themselves had begun wiping down bathroom countertops, door handles and other surfaces on their own, to keep themselves and their coworkers healthy. She added the employees themselves had put up signs as well as marks on floors in places where people queue up – to get food, to get tools, to get drawings – and “just having the marking on the deck just kind of helps to say, oh yeah, this is where I have to stand,” has been very helpful. “I think the shipbuilders themselves are taking this seriously, they’re leaning in and they’re trying to give themselves visual reminders to stay safe,” Hicks said. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 98 “The fact that they’re leaning in like that is refreshing to me, as opposed to waiting for someone else to do it for them. They’re really taking ownership of this situation and their own personal safety.”148 Another April 7, 2020, press report stated: A civilian employee assigned to Submarine Maintenance Engineering, Planning and Procurement Activity at Portsmouth [New Hampshire] Naval Shipyard [PSNY] has died as a result of coronavirus complications, the U.S. Navy announced Monday [April 6]…. Last week, Portsmouth Naval Shipyard officials would not answer questions about the possible presence of COVID-19 among its workforce of nearly 8,000, and instead directed inquiries to the DOD. A Navy spokesperson did say the PNSY workforce was being kept informed about positive cases of the coronavirus. PNSY employees who meet particular \"high-risk\" guidelines have been allowed to take administrative leave, per DOD guidance. Shipyard officials have also said about 20% of its workforce is currently working remotely. The Navy on Monday also issued new guidance requiring face coverings now be worn on DOD property, installations and facilities.149 An April 2, 2020, press report stated: General Dynamics Electric Boat on Thursday [April 2] reacted to criticism from Gov. Gina M. Raimondo the day before about working conditions at the nuclear-submarine builder. Electric Boat, which has shipyards at Quonset Point and in Groton, Connecticut, said it has reduced the “density of people in workspaces” and has allowed some to work remotely. It was unapologetic about not suspending work during the coronavirus crisis. Answering a question Wednesday [April 1] about working conditions at Electric Boat, Raimondo said she had learned of employees who are being required to work in closer contact than the six-foot rule of social distancing and in groups larger than five, which her office has mandated. In strong language, she said she would be calling the shipbuilder’s executives to have them stop the practices. “It’s not okay,” Raimondo said. “You should not have to work in those conditions.” On Thursday, Electric Boat issued a statement saying that some changes had been made. “Our team is working hard to make sure that our facilities are clean and safe ― to ensure this is the case, we’ve increased cleaning in high traffic areas, have taken steps to reduce density of people in workspaces and are providing our employees with the maximum flexibility around working remotely where possible,” the company said in a statement from spokeswoman Elizabeth Power. “Further, we are allowing our employees to advance their paid time off to allow them to be out of work without penalty at this challenging time.” The statement noted, “Electric Boat must remain open, based on direction from the President, Department of Defense and U.S. Navy, which designate our company as part of 148 Megan Eckstein, “How to Keep Social Distance When Building a Warship,” USNI News, April 7, 2020. 149 Hadley Barndollar (Portsmouth Herald), “Portsmouth Naval Shipyard Employee Dies of Coronavirus,” Stars and Stripes, April 7, 2020. See also Josh Farley, “Puget Sound Naval Shipyard, Navy Bases Begin Requiring Masks,” Kitsap [WA] Sun, April 6, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 99 the nation’s critical infrastructure. This is not different for other defense contractors, including other companies based in Rhode Island, who support our national defense.”150 An April 1, 2020, press report stated: The Navy’s acquisition community is seeking to move work ahead of schedule and find as many efficiencies as possible, ahead of what could be a mountain of work to adjust contracts and try to keep programs on track once the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic are more fully understood, the Navy’s top acquisition official said today. James Geurts said in a media roundtable today that, on top of their normal workload, his staff and program managers across the Navy would have to undertake “extra work sorting out all of these programs and contracts … this summer. So we are driving efficiency to create the bandwidth we’re going to need, because there will be a fairly major effort this summer ensuring that we can fairly and reasonably adjust the programs based on the impacts we’re seeing here.” The assistant secretary of the Navy for research, development and acquisition said it was too early to tell exactly how many contract actions might be needed this summer to correct all the delays, contract breaches and other issues that may arise during the pandemic, but he did say that “the services side of business I don’t think will be as drastic an impact as perhaps some of the major industrial operations. But we’re going to have to work our way through it. That’s why it was important for me … to baseline the programs and then we can more quickly sort out where do we need to make adjustments as we go forward.”… “I hear stories of second-, third- and fourth-tier suppliers that were worried about going out of business, worried about how they would keep paying their salaries, and our ability to move and accelerate work into the defense base and then have that be pushed out to the suppliers is absolutely critical, because if they’re not there it won’t matter when we’re ready to recover,” Geurts said. “We need to make sure they’re healthy and ready to roll as we accelerate out of recovery.” In the past couple weeks alone, major shipyards have pushed hundreds of millions of dollars of work out into the supply base. Geurts said this was important during the pandemic because not all cities will be hit by the virus at the same time. With the disease potentially crippling different workforces at different times this year, “as individual suppliers and industrial operations deal with their local situation, they can do it knowing they’ve got work ready to go and then as soon as they’re ready to go at their capacity, that work will be with them.” At the program level, he said, this ability for lower-tier suppliers to forge ahead when and as they’re able to will “enable us to create some resiliency in near-term delay and disruption, as well as enable us to accelerate recovery” and try to get programs back on track later on.151 Another April 1, 2020, press report stated: The U.S. Navy is continuing to build and repair ships amid the COVID-19 pandemic but also is looking ahead to position itself to accelerate as the nation recovers from the pandemic, the service’s top acquisition official said. 150 Edward Parker, “Electric Boat Changes Some Work Conditions in Face of Coronavirus,” Providence Journal, April 2, 2020. 151 Meagan Eckstein, “Navy Accelerating Contracts to Get Ahead of Upcoming Work to Address COVID-Related Program Disruptions,” USNI News, April 1, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 100 The repair yards are “continuing to get the work done,” James F. Geurts, assistant secretary of the Navy for research, development and acquisition, said during an April 1 teleconference with media. “We’ll see some challenges,” Geurts said, but noted that his office is focused on “one or two steps down the road” and on “how to accelerate out of recovery” to maintain the readiness of the fleet. He said that 95% to 98% of the Navy’s acquisition work force is teleworking and that he “was not seeing a drop-off in performance.” The assistant secretary reiterated his focus on three lines of operation:  The health of the defense industrial work force, including the government work force and its industrial partners such as prime contractors, subcontractors, small suppliers and individuals.  Ensuring the health of the industrial base.  Ensuring warfighting readiness of the Navy and U.S. Marine Corps. “We haven’t slowed down,” he said, and that the work force “is continuing to press hard.” Geurts said he continues to see some tightening in the supply chain and that his workforce in continually reassessing measures to work out the challenges. He lately is focusing attention on the transportation and distribution networks to monitor potential disruptions in the supply chain. Geurts has been pressing to get contracts issued earlier than normal to assure the shipbuilders and repair yards and their suppliers that “work is coming.” He pointed out that awarding contracts two months early has the advantage of getting planning and work started early; “creating some resiliency” as challenges arise; and making possible an acceleration of the post-pandemic recovery…. He also said he has yet to see the impact of the pandemic on the next-generation frigate program.152 Another April 1, 2020, press report stated: The Navy is rushing to award several major shipbuilding contracts several months early to keep shipbuilders on the job and save smaller suppliers in danger of going out of business amid the wider manufacturing halt cause by the coronavirus crisis. The biggest is a contract to build the next San Antonio-class amphibious transport dock ship, (LPD 31) which serves as a jumping-off point for Marines heading ashore. The push to accelerate work is part of a wide-ranging effort to buttress the shipbuilding industry and the thousands of small suppliers that make parts for the Navy. The Navy’s top acquisition official, James Geurts, told reporters Wednesday morning the Navy is worried about the effect the state and local shutdowns could have on its shipbuilding and repair efforts. “It’s a national emergency and this is critical national infrastructure,” so the issue is, “how do we orient quickly to get at this aggressively and try not to be reactive in nature.”… “Nobody right now is in the position to float gaps,” Geurts said. His staff has done a detailed analysis of the Navy’s industrial base. They are looking for ways to help the smaller companies not only through moving forward orders, but also finding money for research and development that would help small, innovative companies. 152 Richard R. Burgess, “Geurts: Ship Construction Ongoing, Repairs Continuing Amid COVID-19 Outbreak,” Seapower, April 1, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 101 “I hear stories of second-, third- and fourth-tier suppliers that were worried about going out of business, worried about how they would keep paying their salaries, and our ability to move and accelerate work into the defense base and then have that be pushed out to the suppliers is absolutely critical, because if they’re not there it won’t matter when we’re ready to recover,” Geurts said. Geurts is gathering all of the large shipbuilders and shipyard owners several times a week to check on the status of the workforce and what problems they see coming if the current crisis continues. At the center of these worries is the nation’s largest shipbuilder, Huntington Ingalls, which is the only company that builds both Nimitz and Ford-class aircraft carriers, in addition to sharing work on Virginia-class submarines with Electric Boat. The company has taken steps to attempt to apply social distancing at its shipyards, and has staggered shifts to accommodate workers who might now need to work different hours, company officials say. In an interview earlier this week, several Huntington executives told me they’ve reached out to over 2,000 suppliers in 48 of the 50 US states, and are working to speed up and push contracts as far down the supply chain as possible to keep these small businesses running. “We’re gonna have to brave the storm together and especially some of the smaller suppliers,” said Lucas Hicks, vice president of new construction aircraft carrier programs. “We need their products today, but we also need them in 90 days, so we want to help them brave the storm,” he added. “We’ve actually changed some payment terms on some of our supplier contracts to try to make sure that we can front them what they need to stay afloat. We’re doing some creative stuff to try and help them be able to weather the storm.” The company hasn’t seen any reduction in parts received yet, but acknowledges that the situation changes on a daily basis, as different parts of the country feel the pain of local shutdowns in different ways. Lucas said Huntington does not anticipate it will stop work, but is allowing employees the option of working from home and providing liberal leave to others. Eventually all of this “will have an impact,” especially if the shutdowns are prolonged. “At some point, if it extends for months and months at the rate we’re on, it would have an impact but it’s too early to tell.” Geurts appears to see things the same way. The crisis and its downstream effects is “going to have both a time dimension and geography dimension, and so it will remain a fluid situation,” when it comes to how much the defense industry, and the navy, are affected, Geurts said.153 153 Paul McLeary, “Navy Rushes Shipbuilding Deals To Keep Yards Going In Pandemic,” Breaking Defense, April 1, 2020. See also Marcus Weisgerber, “US Navy Speeds Weapon Buys To Keep Small Suppliers Afloat Amid Coronavirus,” Defense One, April 1, 2020; Justin Katz, “Geurts Projects ‘Major Effort’ This Summer to Correct for Program, Contract Issues Caused by COVID-19,” Inside Defense, April 1, 2020. Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service RL32665 · VERSION 299 · UPDATED 102 Author Information Ronald O'Rourke Specialist in Naval Affairs Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 		2020-05-06T17:18:32-0400
U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Updated April 16, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov R45756 Congressional Research Service SUMMARY U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congress, in the FY2019 National Defense Authorization Act, and the Department of Defense (DOD) has identified electronic warfare (EW) as a critical capability supporting military operations to fulfil the current National Defense Strategy. Collectively, DOD considers procurement appropriations and research, development, test and evaluation (RDT&E) appropriations as part of its investment accounts. Using programs identified by the EW Executive Commission (EW EXCOM), this report traces funding for three of the military services (Air Force, Army, and Navy) along with several defense agencies (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, Defense Information Systems Agency, the Joint Staff, Office of the Secretary of Defense Operational Test and Evaluation, and U.S. Special Operations Command). This report compares DOD’s funding requests for FY2019, FY2020, and FY2021 to assess if DOD seeks to increase the funding of the EW portfolio (by increasing funding), decrease its funding, or keep the portfolio relatively unchanged. Insights into EW Program Funding This report tracks DOD funding requests for approximately 65 research and develop program elements and 30 procurement line items across FY2019 and FY2021. Reviewing these three fiscal years request allows for comparisons across the EW portfolio and provides insights into how EW was prioritized relative to the overall DOD budget. In addition to tracking funding requests in each of the respective fiscal years and identifying what Congress appropriated in FY2019 and FY2020, this report looks at the future years defense program (FYDP) to identify potential trends in the EW portfolio. This report looks at the combination of the procurement and RDT&E budget requests to provide a comprehensive, unclassified overview of the total EW program requests within DOD. DOD requested at least $10.1 billion in FY2019, $10.2 billion in FY2020, and $9.7 billion in FY2021 for EW, an amount analogous to the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter program ($10.7 billion in FY2019) or a Ford-class aircraft carrier ($12.5 billion in total ship-building procurement). Based on statements by several senior defense officials and the conclusions of the National Defense Strategy Commission, it could be expected that DOD is likely to substantially increase funding for EW programs. CRS assesses that DOD requested 11.5% more funding for EW RDT&E in FY2021 than what was projected in the FY2019 budget, but 1.7% less than what was projected in the FY2020 budget. Comparing the procurement budget, the FY2021 request seeks to increase funding by 2.2% compared to FY2019 projections, but decrease funding by 10.3% compared to what was projected in the FY2020 request. From a portfolio perspective, CRS assesses that the Administration projects $51.7 billion over the FY2021 Future Years Defense Program (FYDP), $259 million less than the FY2020 FYDP, but $4.5 billion more than the FY2019 FYDP. Overall, it appears the Administration is prioritizing research and development for EW programs, while decreasing procurement, which aligns with the overall FY2021 DOD budget request. Potential Issues for Congress Based on this analysis, this report identifies three potential issues for Congress  Is DOD appropriately funding the EW portfolio?  How does DOD use appropriated funds for EW programs? Is DOD potentially buying new capabilities with research and development funds, when it should use procurement funding?  Does DOD understand what it is developing and procuring within the EW portfolio? R45756 April 16, 2020 John R. Hoehn Analyst in Military Capabilities and Programs U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 EW in Support of the National Defense Strategy ............................................................................ 1 Methodology ................................................................................................................................... 2 EW Research and Development Funding ........................................................................................ 3 FY2019 RDT&E Funding ......................................................................................................... 3 FY2020 RDT&E Funding ......................................................................................................... 5 FY2021 Request ........................................................................................................................ 6 FY2019 Request Through FY2021 Request RDT&E Funding Comparison ............................ 8 EW Procurement Funding ............................................................................................................... 9 FY2019 Procurement Funding .................................................................................................. 9 FY2020 Funding ..................................................................................................................... 10 FY2021 Request ....................................................................................................................... 11 FY2019 Request through FY2021 Request Procurement Funding Comparison .................... 12 Comparison of RDT&E and Procurement Funding ...................................................................... 13 Potential Issues for Congress......................................................................................................... 14 EW Funding Levels ................................................................................................................. 14 Challenges with Appropriations Usage ................................................................................... 14 Assessing EW Plans and Programs ......................................................................................... 15 Figures Figure 1. FY2019 EW RDT&E Requested and Enacted Funding .................................................. 4 Figure 2. FY2020 EW RDT&E Requested and Enacted Funding .................................................. 6 Figure 3. Planned EW RDT&E Funding in the FY2019 and FY2020 DOD Budget Requests ........................................................................................................................... 8 Figure 4. FY2019 Electronic Warfare Procurement Funding ........................................................ 10 Figure 5. Planned EW Procurement Funding in the FY2019-FY2021 DOD Budget Requests ..................................................................................................................................... 12 Figure 6. Relationship between RDT&E and Procurement Funding ............................................ 13 Tables Table 1. FY2019 Requested and Future Year Funding for DOD Electronic Warfare RDT&E ........................................................................................................................................ 3 Table 2. FY2020 Requested and Projected Funding for DOD Electronic Warfare RDT&E ........... 5 Table 3. FY2021 Requested and Projected Funding for DOD Electronic Warfare RDT&E ........... 7 Table 4. FY2019 Requested and Future Year Funding for DOD Electronic Warfare Procurement .................................................................................................................... 9 Table 5. FY2020 Requested and Future Year Funding for DOD Electronic Warfare Procurement .................................................................................................................. 10 Table 6. FY2021 Requested and Future Year Funding for DOD Electronic Warfare Procurement ................................................................................................................... 11 U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Contacts Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 16 U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction Congress has shown an interest in the Department of Defense’s (DOD’s) electronic warfare (EW) portfolio, requiring an independent assessment of EW plans and programs in the FY2019 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA). This report addresses U.S. military EW funding across research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E) and procurement appropriations. Using the FY2019 through FY2021 budget request documents, this analysis compares funding profiles between fiscal years, as well as projected funding across the future years defense program (FYDP). Using unclassified sources, CRS estimates that DOD seeks to invest approximately $9.7 billion in FY2021 funding for EW programs. Discussion of specific EW-related programs, as well as an overview of electronic warfare, are outside the scope of this report.1 The following analysis looks at EW funding identified by the DOD’s EW Executive Commission (EW EXCOM). The EW EXCOM identified a series of RDT&E program elements from three of the military services (Air Force, Army and Navy), as well as several defense agencies (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, Defense Information Systems Agency, the Joint Staff, Office of the Secretary of Defense Operational Test and Evaluation, and U.S. Special Operations Command). Using the program elements identified, this analysis extrapolates procurement funding to provide an overview of DOD investments in electronic warfare in FY2019 and FY2020 and requested investments in FY2021. EW in Support of the National Defense Strategy Over the past two decades, China and Russia have seen U.S. military command and control, intelligence surveillance, and reconnaissance (C2ISR) networks as a critical capability that they must develop capabilities against which to effectively compete.2 Both countries, as a result, have invested heavily in EW-related systems.3 According to one analyst, the Russian military views electronic warfare as a “type of armed struggle using electronic means against enemy C4ISR [command, control, communications, computers] to ‘change the quality of information,’ or using electronic means against various assets to change the condition of the operational environment.”4 Similarly, China has developed sophisticated EW capabilities to disrupt and deny adversary access to command and control systems—particularly space-based systems.5 Not only has the Chinese military been developing new systems, but it routinely exercises with them. In its most 1 For an overview of electronic warfare, see CRS In Focus IF11118, Defense Primer: Electronic Warfare, by John R. Hoehn. For a discussion of Airborne Electronic Attack Aircraft, see CRS Report R44572, U.S. Airborne Electronic Attack Programs: Background and Issues for Congress, by John R. Hoehn. 2 Robert N. McDermott’s report Russia’s Electronic Warfare Capabilities to 2025, International Centre for Defence and Security, September 2017, accessed at https://icds.ee/wp-content/uploads/2018/ICDS_Report_Russias_Electronic_Warfare_to_2025.pdf. 3 See Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2018, p. 74, and Department of Defense, Defense Intelligence Agency, Russia Military Power, Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations, 2017, p. 12. 4 See Department of Defense, Defense Intelligence Agency, Russia Military Power, Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations, 2017, p. 42, and Robert N. McDermott’s Russia’s Electronic Warfare Capabilities to 2025, p. 3. International Centre for Defence and Security, September 2017. 5 Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2019, Washington, DC, 2019. U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 2 recent annual report to Congress, DOD documented at least four major exercises the People’s Liberation Army used to test and demonstrate their capabilities.6 The National Defense Strategy Commission, an independent Congressional commission charged with evaluating the DOD’s National Defense Strategy, identified EW as a critical capability to achieve the goals of the National Defense Strategy. 7 Similarly, in its FY2019 through FY2021 Defense Budget Overview request documents,8 DOD identified EW as a priority to improve platform and network survivability; provide advanced jamming techniques to disrupt radars, communications, and command and control systems; and provide measures to defend the space domain and maintain power projection forces. Methodology The Executive Branch and the Congress have placed a higher priority on EW programs in recent years. In 2015, the Deputy Secretary of Defense established the EW EXCOM—co-chaired by the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment (USD A&S) and Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff—to identify emerging EW technologies.9 The FY2017 NDAA required the EW EXCOM to develop an EW Strategy. In its strategy, the EW EXCOM identified program elements and projects with EW facets in each of the services’ and Defense-wide Research, Development, Test and Evaluation (RDT&E) appropriations. It did not, however, identify procurement lines due to complexity and classification issues.10 Furthermore, some program elements the EXCOM identified might not clearly refer to EW capabilities, like DARPA’s Electronics Technology. Other program elements that support EW operations, however, such as the Navy’s E-2D Hawkeye, are not included in the EXCOM’s program list. With these methodological limitations, this report treats the EW EXCOM’s list of 65 program elements and projects as encompassing DOD EW programs. The following analysis compares the FY2019 budget request for these programs with the FY2020 and FY2021 requests. The analysis includes funding for the Army, Navy, Air Force, DARPA, Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA), the Joint Staff, Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), Operational Test and 6 Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2019, p. 23, Washington, DC, 2019. 7 National Defense Strategy Commission, Providing the Common Defense: The Assessment and Recommendations of the National Defense Strategy Commission, 2018, accessed on May 7, 2019 at https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/2018-11/providing-for-the-common-defense.pdf. 8 Department of Defense FY2019 Budget Overview Brief, accessed on May 7, 2019 at https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/Documents/pubs/FY2019-Budget-Request-Overview-Book.pdf, and Department of Defense FY2020 Budget Overview Brief, accessed on May 7, 2019 at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2020/fy2020_Budget_Request_Overview_Book.pdf. 9 Department of Defense Directive (DODD) 3222.04, Electronic Warfare Policy, March 26, 2014. Incorporating Change 2, August 31, 2018, accessed at https://www.esd.whs.mil/Portals/54/Documents/DD/issuances/dodd/3222.04.pdf?ver=2018-10-11-075832-267. DODD 3222.04 identifies the Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD AT&L) as the co-chair of the EW EXCOM, however, the DOD was reorganized based on the FY2017 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 114-328), which recreated two new Undersecretary of Defense for Research and Engineering (USD R&E) and the Undersecretary of Defense for (Acquisition and Sustainment). Though DODD 3222.04 was updated after the organizational split, it still states that USD AT&L is the co-chair, based on the author’s interpretation of the USD AT&L’s responsibilities outlined it appears the USD A&S is the new co-chair of the organization since the instruction states that USD A&S is the office of primary responsibility. 10 Sydney Freedberg, “Electronic Warfare Funding Up, But Short of DSB Marker,” Breaking Defense, November 28, 2018, accessed at https://breakingdefense.com/2018/11/electronic-warfare-funding-up-still-short-of-dsb-recommendation/. U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 3 Evaluation (OT&E), and Special Operations Command (SOCOM), using program elements identified by EXCOM in its strategy document, which are aggregated at the department or agency level. The FY2021 request includes Space Force programs, which had been part of the Air Force request in prior years. Though the EW EXCOM did not identify EW procurement programs, DOD procurement justification documents (P-40s) identify related research and development program elements. Using the Defense Technical Information Center investment budget search tool,11 this analysis identified the associated EW procurement programs—28 in FY2019, 36 in FY2020, and 33 in FY2021. Some research and development efforts—such as the F/A-18 Hornet fighter jet and MQ-9 Reaper drone—did not differentiate funding for EW-specific procurement and therefore included procurement for aircraft. These procurements were excluded so as not to artificially inflate the funding profile. Based on the RDT&E profiles and program element searches, CRS did not identify DISA, Joint Staff, OSD, and DARPA programs with procurement appropriations. DOD has stated that it has prioritized EW funding above other programs.12 This report compares funding requests between the three fiscal years to assess if DOD seeks to increase funding of the EW portfolio (by increasing funding), decrease funding, or keep the portfolio relatively unchanged. To assess these changes, the percentage change from FY2019 to FY2020 is calculated for each appropriations category, and then compared to an overall DOD percentage change. EW Research and Development Funding FY2019 RDT&E Funding Table 1. FY2019 Requested and Future Year Funding for DOD Electronic Warfare RDT&E (in millions of dollars) Department/Agency FY2019 Request FY2019 Enacted Future Years FY2020 FY2021 FY2022 FY2023 Requested FYDP Total Navy 2,443.0 2,393.5 2,345.7 2,090.4 1,611.9 1,417.0 9,908.1 Air Force 1,143.3 1,194.3 1,089.0 966.7 946.2 1,201.4 5,346.6 Army 859.7 945.5 621.0 581.1 576.3 528.5 3,166.6 DARPA 740.5 736.3 809.6 944.3 965.4 991.6 4,451.4 Other 341.0 520.6 312.7 311.4 313.8 351.7 1,630.6 Total 5,527.5 5,790.2 5,178.0 4,894.0 4,413.6 4,490.1 24,503.3 Source: Air Force FY2019-FY2020 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-3b, Army FY2019-FY2020 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-5, Navy FY2019-FY2020 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-5, Defense-wide FY2019-FY2020 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 5. 11 Defense Technical Information Center, accessed at https://apps.dtic.mil/dodinvestment/#/. 12 Department of Defense FY2020 Budget Overview Brief, accessed on May 7, 2019 at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2020/fy2020_Budget_Request_Overview_Book.pdf. U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 4 Notes: The “Other” category combines funding from DISA, Joint Staff, OSD, OTE, and SOCOM. Data reported from the EW EXCOM and compiled by the Association of the Old Crows based on EW EXCOM designated Program Elements and Projects. The “FY2019 Enacted” column is derived from the FY2020 budget request. Table 1, above, provides an overview of the FY2019 EW RDT&E funding request, FY2019-enacted funding, and projected funding for EW program elements in each of the departments and agencies. The FY2019 request serves as a baseline to compare how DOD changed its funding priorities for FY2020. Of note, DOD requested $5.53 billion in EW RDT&E for FY2019 and planned on spending approximately $24.5 billion across the FYDP. The Navy requested the most funding in FY2019 ($2.44 billion), followed by the Air Force ($1.14 billion), the Army ($859.7 million), DARPA ($740 million), and other organizations ($341 million). EW funding was anticipated to peak in FY2019 then curtail through FY2022, followed by a slight increase in FY2023. Figure 1. FY2019 EW RDT&E Requested and Enacted Funding Source: Air Force FY2019-FY2020 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-3b, Army FY2019-FY2020 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-5, Navy FY2019 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-5, Defense-wide FY2019-FY2020 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 5. Note: Values presented are in nominal dollars. Figure 1, above, shows the difference between the Administration’s FY2019 DOD request and the enacted amount of EW RDT&E. DOD requested a total of approximately $5.5 billion in FY2019; Congress enacted approximately $5.8 billion, $263 million above the requested amount. Of particular note, OSD OT&E received additional funding for subsequent testing. The largest increases between the FY2019 request and enacted levels were for “Other” agencies—primarily Operational Test and Evaluation—and the Army. The Navy and DARPA saw slight decreases from their requested levels. U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 5 FY2020 RDT&E Funding Table 2. FY2020 Requested and Projected Funding for DOD Electronic Warfare RDT&E (in millions of dollars) Department/ Agency FY2020 Requested Future Years FY2020 Enacted FY2021 FY2022 FY2023 FY2024 FYDP Total Navy 2,507.6 2,507.0 2,402.0 1,920.3 1,566.6 1,554.7 9,951.2 Air Force 1,176.3 1,304.2 1,137.2 1,029.4 1,063.3 1,683.6 6,089.8 Army 915.6 889.5 861.7 635.4 589.2 536.2 3,538.2 DARPA 690.6 659.3 880.7 921.7 957.6 981.5 4,432.2 Other 391.5 397.3 361.6 362.6 357.3 344.1 1,817.1 Total 5,681.5 5,757.3 5,643.2 4,869.5 4,534.0 5,100.2 25,828.5 Source: Air Force FY2020-FY2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-3b, Army FY2020-FY2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-5, Navy FY2020-FY2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-5, Defense-wide FY2020-FY2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 5. Notes: The “Other” category combines funding from DISA, Joint Staff, OSD, OTE, and SOCOM. Data analyzed by CRS. Values may not add due to rounding. Table 2 provides the FY2020 request and projected future year funding levels for EW RDT&E appropriations in DOD’s FY2020 budget request. Of particular note, the Administration’s DOD budget requested $504 million in additional RDT&E funding for FY2020 compared with the FY2019 request. While it would follow a trend line similar to FY2019’s projection, DOD’s plan adds additional money to EW capabilities in each of the out-years of the FYDP. This increase can primarily be attributed to the Navy’s start of the Next Generation Jammer-Low Band program, as well as the Army’s renewed focus on EW capabilities. U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 6 Figure 2. FY2020 EW RDT&E Requested and Enacted Funding Source: Air Force FY2020-FY2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-3b, Army FY2020-FY2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-5, Navy FY2020-FY2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-5, Defense-wide FY2020-FY2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 5. Note: Values presented are in nominal dollars. Figure 2 provides a comparison between requested and appropriated amounts by military department for FY2020. There was an overall increase in $140 million in EW research and development efforts. The Air Force received approximately $139 million in additional funding compared to the requested amount, with the largest increases for Advanced Aerospace Sensor Technologies and EW Quick Reaction Capabilities. The Navy received an additional $58 million for EW research and development efforts, including more funding for the F/A-18 Infrared Search and Track development and Shipboard Information Warfare Exploitation programs. These increases were partially offset by a $31 million reduction in DARPA funding for EW research and development and a $26 million reduction in Army funding for such efforts. DARPA programs all saw relatively small decreases in funding. Army funding decreases included reductions to assured Precision, Navigation and Timing equipment development. FY2021 Request The FY2021 RDT&E request includes approximately $5.7 billion across all military departments and agencies. The Navy requested the most, following a similar trend in FY2019 and FY2020. The Army requested the second most, replacing the Air Force in prior years. Table 3 provides an overview of the FY2021 request. U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 7 Table 3. FY2021 Requested and Projected Funding for DOD Electronic Warfare RDT&E (in millions of dollars) Future Years Department / Agency FY2021 FY2022 FY2023 FY2024 FY2025 FYDP Total Navy 2,379.1 1,964.8 1,676.0 1,612.5 1,567.4 9,199.8 Air Force 753.0 662.7 551.1 740.8 839.5 3,547.1 Army 1,167.7 937.7 743.2 586.4 578.9 4,013.8 DARPA 660.9 731.4 788.7 907.4 879.6 3,968.0 Space Force 209.4 233.8 469.7 851.2 679.3 2,443.5 Other 397.3 312.2 288.8 284.4 291.3 1,462.7 TOTAL 5,757.3 5,482.2 4,819.3 4,513.2 4,989.6 4,830.6 Source: Air Force FY2019-2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-3b, Army FY2019-2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-5, Navy FY2019-2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-5, Defense-wide FY2019 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 5, Space Force FY2021 Research, Development, Test and Evaluation Budget Justification. Notes: The “Other” category combines funding from DISA, Joint Staff, OSD, OTE, and SOCOM. Data analyzed by CRS. Values may not add due to rounding. The Army increased EW RDT&E funding by $305 million when comparing what was projected from the FY2020 request and what was requested in FY2021. The Air Force experienced the most changes, restructuring several program elements and transferring others to the Space Force. The top three programs that received increased funding include (1) the Army’s Rapid Capability Development and Maturation program (increased by $247 million compared to the FY2020 projection for FY2021),13 (2) the F/A-18 Infrared Search and Track (IRST) development (increased $168 million),14 and (3) the Eagle Passive Active Warning System (increased by $146 million).15 Programs that saw the largest reductions include the B-2 Defensive Management System (reduced by $164 million),16 DARPA’s Sensors and Processing Systems program 13 This project funds development for directed energy, long-range precision fires, air and missile defense, cyber, artificial intelligence, counter-unmanned aircraft systems, among other highly demanded capabilities. For more information, see Department of the Army, Research and Development Budget Request, February 2020, pp. 438-440, https://www.asafm.army.mil/Portals/72/Documents/BudgetMaterial/2021/Base%20Budget/rdte/RDTE_BA_5C_FY_2021_PB_RDTE_Vol%202_Budget_Activity_5C.pdf. 14 The F/A-18 IRST is a sensor that uses heat signatures to detect and potentially target adversary aircraft. 15 The Eagle Passive Active Warning System is designed to alert F-15 pilots if they are targeted by enemy radar equipment. 16 The Air Force announced that it was restructuring the B-2 Defensive Management System program to include only cockpit upgrades instead of a suite of technologies to reduce the risk of the B-2 flying in defended airspace. For more information, see Valerie Insinna, “The Air Force is massively scaling back a major upgrade for the B-2 stealth bomber,” Defense News, February 12, 2020, at https://www.defensenews.com/smr/federal-budget/2020/02/12/the-air-force-is-massively-scaling-back-a-major-upgrade-for-the-b-2-stealth-bomber/. U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 8 (reduced by $142 million),17 and the Space Force’s Protected Tactical Satellite Communications (reduced $48 million).18 FY2019 Request Through FY2021 Request RDT&E Funding Comparison Figure 3. Planned EW RDT&E Funding in the FY2019 and FY2020 DOD Budget Requests Source: Air Force FY2019-2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-3b, Army FY2019-2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-5, Navy FY2019-2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-5, Defense-wide FY2019 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 5, Space Force FY2021 Research, Development, Test and Evaluation Budget Justification. Note: Values presented are in nominal (or current) dollars. CRS assesses that the FY2021 request includes 93 program elements associated with electronic warfare and 157 related projects. This represents a slight increase from previous years, partly as a result of the newly established Space Force, the Air Force restructuring research projects, and the Army’s restructuring of programs. Figure 3 depicts funding projections from the FY2019, FY2020, and FY2021 requests. The FY2021 request aligns closely with the FY2020 request, reducing funding by $104 million from projections in FY2020. The FY2021 request projects $25.6 billion over five years; FY2019 projected $24.6 billion over the FYDP, FY2020 similarly projected $25.6 billion. 17 This DARPA project funds advanced sensors for intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance activities. Of particular note, this includes Dynamically Composed RF systems, new sensors to detect high-level targets, and the spatial temporal and orientation information for contested environments, among other activities. For more information, see Department of Defense, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Budget Request, Washington, DC, February 2020, pp. 232-235, https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2021/budget_justification/pdfs/03_RDT_and_E/RDTE_Vol1_DARPA_MasterJustificationBook_PB_2021.pdf. 18 The Navy reported a $115 decrease in Innovative Naval Prototypes; however, this is a result of the program element being restructured due to the FY2017 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 114-328). U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 9 DOD has increased planned EW RDT&E funding from $4.9 billion in its FY2019 request to $5.6 billion in its FY2020 request, then down to $5.5 billion in the FY2021 request. The FY2021 request represents an 11.7% increase in funding when compared to FY2019 projections, but a 1.7% decrease from the projected funding from FY2020 request. The overall change from FY2019 to FY2021 (11.7%) is double the requested 4.9% increase in overall DOD funding from FY2019 to FY2020. EW Procurement Funding FY2019 Procurement Funding Table 4. FY2019 Requested and Future Year Funding for DOD Electronic Warfare Procurement (in millions of dollars) Department/ Agency FY2019 Request FY2019 Enacted Future Years FY2020 FY2021 FY2022 FY2023 Requested FYDP Total Navy 2,431.7 2,420.4 2,714.3 2,778.0 3,059.4 3,539.0 14,522.5 Air Force 919.4 1,363.4 903.1 818.2 1,032.9 936.0 4,609.6 Army 742.8 742.5 350.4 270.1 224.8 232.3 1,820.3 SOCOM 459.7 458.5 293.6 304.3 282.5 295.4 1,635.5 TOTAL 4,553.6 4,984.8 4,261.5 4,170.7 4,599.5 5,002.6 22,587.9 Source: Air Force FY2019-FY2020 Aircraft, Other, and Space procurement budget justifications; Army FY2019-FY2020 Aircraft, Missile, and Other procurement budget justifications; Navy FY2019-FY2020 Aircraft, Ammunition, Marine Corps and Other procurement budget justifications; SOCOM FY2019-FY2020 procurement budget justification. Table 4, above, provides an overview of the FY2019 EW procurement request along with enacted procurement appropriations. Overall, the Administration requested $4.55 billion for EW-related procurement activities. The Navy requested the most ($2.43 billion), followed by the Air Force ($919 million) and the Army ($743 million). Funding was projected to decline through FY2021 before increasing in FY2022 and FY2023, as a result of the first increment of the Next Generation Jammer (NGJ) entering production. The NGJ is a series of jamming pods designed to disrupt air defense radars and comminutions, replacing the Vietnam-era ALQ-99 jammers. U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 10 Figure 4. FY2019 Electronic Warfare Procurement Funding FY2019 Requested and Enacted Funding Source: Air Force FY2019-FY2020 Aircraft, Other, and Space procurement budget justifications; Army FY2019-FY2020 Aircraft, Missile, and Other procurement budget justifications; Navy FY2019-FY2020 Aircraft, Ammunition, Marine Corps and Other procurement budget justifications; SOCOM FY2019-FY2020 procurement budget justification. Congress added $431 million in appropriations, representing a 9.5% increase over what the Administration requested. Figure 4 provides the differences between what was requested versus enacted. Of note, the Air Force received an additional $444 million over the requested amount due to Congress funding an additional EC-37B aircraft—which is designed to jam air defense radars and command and control systems—as well as increases to combat training ranges and simulations and adjustments to the F-15 defensive systems. The Navy and SOCOM saw minor decreases in appropriations. FY2020 Funding Table 5. FY2020 Requested and Future Year Funding for DOD Electronic Warfare Procurement (in millions of dollars) Department/ Agency FY2020 Request Future Years FY2020 Enacted FY2021 FY2022 FY2023 FY2024 Requested FYDP Total Navy 2,444.2 2,270.7 2,790.3 3,392.8 4,059.1 4,212.5 16,899.0 Air Force 1,209.6 1,073.5 1,087.7 1,271.1 1,187.6 1,158.0 5,914.1 Army 574.4 428.4 691.8 693.7 787.4 607.9 3,355.1 SOCOM 336.0 336.0 331.6 312.7 332.2 339.4 1,651.9 TOTAL 4,564.2 4,114.2 4,901.4 5,670.3 6,366.3 6,317.8 27,820.1 U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 11 Source: Air Force FY2020-FY2021 Aircraft, Other, and Space procurement budget justifications; Army FY2020-FY2021 Aircraft, Missile, and Other procurement budget justifications; Navy FY2020-FY2021 Aircraft, Ammunition, Other, and Weapons procurement budget justifications; SOCOM FY2020-FY2021 procurement budget justification, Space Force FY2021 procurement budget justification. The Administration requested $4.56 billion in EW procurement for FY2020, adding an additional $303 million compared to what was planned in FY2019. Table 5 provides an overview of the overall FY2020 request. The Navy again requested the largest amount ($2.44 billion), followed by the Air Force ($1.21 billion) and the Army ($574 million). The Air Force’s request increased the most (by $306 million) compared with what had been planned for FY2020 in the previous FY2019 request, followed by the Army (by $224 million).19 This requested increase can be partially attributed to the Army starting a new program for Assured Positioning, Navigation and Timing and the Air Force’s transition of the E-11 Battlefield Airborne Communications Node (BACN) to a program of record and increases to E-3 Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) modifications. FY2021 Request Procurement for EW equipment was $4.2 billion. The Navy and the Air Force requested the largest proportions of the request, following similar trends identified in FY2019 and FY2020. New to the FY2021 request was funding for the Space Force—the newest military service and authorized in the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 116-92). Table 6 provides an overview of the FY2021 procurement request. Procurement in FY2021 is the lowest of the three fiscal years tracked in this report, only slightly higher than funding levels projected from the FY2019 request. Table 6. FY2021 Requested and Future Year Funding for DOD Electronic Warfare Procurement (in millions of dollars) Department/Agency FY2021 Future Years FY2022 FY2023 FY2024 FY2025 FYDP Navy 2,156.0 2,538.5 3,458.7 3,522.0 3,750.7 15,425.9 Air Force 1,005.6 1,292.6 1,302.2 1,191.9 1,326.7 6,118.9 Army 744.8 799.6 948.0 693.8 700.2 3,886.3 SOCOM 293.3 277.0 282.6 285.7 286.7 1,425.3 Space Force 65.5 65.6 66.8 62.8 2.0 262.7 TOTAL 4,265.2 4,973.3 6,058.4 5,756.1 6,066.3 27,119.2 Source: Air Force FY2021 Aircraft, Other, and Space procurement budget justifications; Army FY2021 Aircraft, Missile, and Other procurement budget justifications; Navy FY2021 Aircraft, Ammunition, Other, and Weapons procurement budget justifications; SOCOM FY2021 procurement budget justification, Space Force FY2021 procurement budget justification. There are a few trends to highlight from the FY2021 request. First, Navy procurement saw the largest decreases. The primary programs with significant reductions include MQ-4 Triton procurement (reduced $543 million compared to projections for FY2021 from the FY2020 19 The Air Force and Army requested amounts for FY2020 EW procurement are less than what was enacted in FY2019. U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 12 request),20 MQ-4 Triton procurement (reduced $373 million),21 and AN/ALQ-32s (reduced $159 million).22 Procurement for Assured Precision Navigation, and Timing (PNT) equipment (increased $93 million), Patriot Modifications (increased $85 million), and the Integrated Fire Protection (IFPC) Family of Systems (increased $46 million) received the largest increases compared to the FY2020 request. The funding data suggest the Navy is reevaluating its EW programs, particularly for the surface fleet. FY2019 Request through FY2021 Request Procurement Funding Comparison Figure 5. Planned EW Procurement Funding in the FY2019-FY2021 DOD Budget Requests Source: Air Force FY2019-FY2021 Aircraft, Other, and Space procurement budget justifications; Army FY2019-FY2021 Aircraft, Missile, and Other procurement budget justifications; Navy FY2019-FY2021 Aircraft, Ammunition, Marine Corps and Other procurement budget justifications; SOCOM FY2019-FY2021 procurement budget justification; Space Force FY2021 procurement justification. The FY2021 request included approximately $3.7 billion to procure electronic warfare capabilities. This represents a 22.5% reduction in procurement funding compared to what was projected for FY2021 in the FY2020 request ($4.8 billion). The FY2021 FYDP projects $22.8 billion in funding over the next five years; this is compared to the FY2019 FYDP, which projected $22.5 billion, and the FY2020 FYDP, which projected $26.3 billion. Figure 5 depicts each of the FYDPs as a comparison. Figure 5 illustrates the differences between the Administration’s plans for EW procurement from FY2019 to FY2021. The FY2020 request added an additional $5.23 billion across the FYDP compared with the FY2019 FYDP. FY2021 added $94 million compared to the FY2019 request, but reduced procurement by $491 million compared to projections from the FY2020 request. The 20 The DDG Modernization line item funds modifications of MQ-4Cs, including intelligence sensors. 21 This procurement line item funds modifications of MQ-4Cs, including intelligence sensors. 22 The AN/SLQ-32 funds EW sensors for surface combatants. This includes the Surface Electronic Warfare Improvements Block 1, Small Ship Electronic Measures System, and High Gain Sensitivity, among other activities. U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 13 Navy observed the largest decrease in procurement funding, resulting in a reduction of $489 million. The Air Force saw a reduction of $81 million as well, primarily due to the introduction of the Space Force. The Army saw the largest increase, approximately $53 million. It might be argued that DOD is making EW procurement a priority, which is aligned with the strategic direction in the National Defense Strategy and recommendations by the National Defense Strategy Commission. DOD requested an additional 4.9% increase in funding compared to what it projected in FY2019. EW procurement, however, increased by 7.1% from the FY2019 request compared to what was requested in FY2020—a 2.2% increase over the DOD request. Comparison of RDT&E and Procurement Funding Figure 6. Relationship between RDT&E and Procurement Funding Source: Air Force FY2019-FY2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-3b, Army FY2019-FY2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-5, Navy FY2019-FY2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 1-5, Defense-wide FY2019-FY2021 Research, Development Test and Evaluation Budget Justification Volume 5, Air Force FY2019-FY2021 Aircraft, Other, and Space procurement budget justifications; Army FY2019-FY2021 Aircraft, Missile, and Other procurement budget justifications; Navy FY2019-FY2021 Aircraft, Ammunition, Marine Corps and Other procurement budget justifications; SOCOM FY2019-FY2021 procurement budget justification. Figure 6, above, shows the relationship between RDT&E and procurement. Some might be concerned looking exclusively at the planned funding levels for RDT&E since this appropriation declines over the FYDP. However, several programs currently receiving RDT&E funding—such as the NGJ and the E-11 BACN—transition from being developmental programs to fielded systems. Also of note, it appears that the Administration may have changed its plans on fielding new programs. Based on funding projections the Administration plans on accelerating the Next Generation Jammer quicker than previously anticipated. In addition, it appears the Administration decided to accelerate the F-15 electronic warfare systems (F-15 EPAWS). The increase in planned procurement funding in FY2020 is particularly significant compared to the planned funding profile in FY2019. Combining both appropriations, DOD requested an additional $662.5 million for EW in FY2021 compared to what it had initially projected in the FY2019 request; however, the FY2021 request is $591.3 million lower than had been projected from the FY2020 request. This represents a 7.3% U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 14 increase in the portfolio from FY2019 projections but a 5.7% decrease compared to projections from the FY2020 projections. Potential Issues for Congress EW Funding Levels One potential issue for Congress is the overall funding level for EW programs. DOD requested approximately $9.7 billion dollars in FY2021 for the EW portfolio, based on unclassified budget request documents.23 Historically, individual EW programs have not been generally seen as large enough for in-depth congressional scrutiny;24 however, combined, these programs represent funding levels nearly as much as an aircraft carrier ($12.5 billion in total procurement for CVN-80)25 or the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter procurement ($10.7 billion in FY2019).26 Congress may ask whether $10.2 billion is sufficient for DOD to execute its missions, or, conversely, whether this funding level is too much. Second, Congress may ask whether each of the military services is funding unique programs, or whether there are overlapping programs that provide similar capabilities. To understand these questions, Congress may consider a historical perspective on how much the DOD allocated for EW to compare if current funding exceeds or under resources the portfolio. A second metric Congress may potentially consider using is the ratio of spending for procurement and RDT&E appropriations to understand where in the lifecycle EW programs currently are, and if the current portfolio is an anomaly. Many EW programs are highly classified due to their close relationship with intelligence and command and control programs. As a result, there is potentially insufficient unclassified information to assess how much DOD is currently spending on EW. This limitation of data presents a potential oversight issue for Congress.27 Challenges with Appropriations Usage Some have argued that DOD has not adequately prioritized EW over the past several years. The budget projections described above may support the argument that DOD is now prioritizing investment in EW funding.28 Congress may consider whether DOD uses research and development funding to procure new electronic components. Congress might consider requiring DOD to report all EW-related funding for procurements, as well as ensuring that DOD is not procuring new or advanced electronics through other appropriations. 23 This funding does not include classified programs or other research and development efforts or procurements that had distinctly EW facets. 24 Some exceptions to this have included the Ec-130H Compass Call jamming aircraft and its replacement, the EC-37B Compass Call Rehost. 25 CRS Report RS20643, Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 26 CRS Report RL30563, F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program, by Jeremiah Gertler. 27 For a more detailed discussion about Congressional oversight of classified programs see CRS Report R44463, Air Force B-21 Raider Long-Range Strike Bomber, by Jeremiah Gertler. 28 For example, see Bryan Clark and Mark Gunzinger, Winning the Airwaves: Regaining America’s Dominance in the Electromagnetic Spectrum, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, Washington, DC, 2017, https://csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/CSBA6292-EW_Reprint_WEB.pdf. U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 15 The EW EXCOM has stated that many procurement programs have EW-related spending, and it is difficult and complex to differentiate among them.29 As a result, this report does not include all EW-related procurement programs, and therefore does not account for all EW funding. If Congress maintains interest in EW procurement, it may consider requiring DOD to report all EW-related procurement programs, as well as to break out specific EW-related initiatives within a larger procurement program.30 Assessing EW Plans and Programs Congress has shown an interest in developing a comprehensive assessment of EW plans and programs across each of the DOD services and agencies. The FY2019 NDAA (P.L. 115-232) required DOD to contract with a scientific organization to perform an independent assessment of DOD-related EW plans and programs.31 According to the legislation, this assessment identified U.S. programs, orders of battle and doctrine; analyze adversary programs, orders of battle and doctrine; and make recommendations for how the U.S. military might counteract adversary plans and programs.32 The Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments delivered the NDAA mandated study in December 2019;33 however, the FY2020 NDAA required a similar study to be performed. In addition to requesting an independent assessment of EW programs and plans, the FY2019 NDAA required DOD to update its Electronic Warfare Strategy from 2017 and submit it to Congress.34 Congress has expressed concern that DOD has not synchronized its efforts to ensure its dominance in the electromagnetic spectrum. For DOD to remain competitive, Congress directed the Secretary of Defense and a senior designated official to develop a process and procedure to integrate and enhance EW mission areas across DOD (i.e., to ensure each of the services cooperates and is integrated in the Joint force, as opposed to having service-specific solutions). This section of the NDAA requires DOD to develop a “defense-wide strategy, planning, and budgeting [process and procedures] with respect to conduct of such operations [electronic attack] by the Department, including activities conducted to counter and deter such operations by malign actors.”35 The strategy was delivered in 2019; however, much of the detail of this particular strategy is classified. 29 Sydney Freedberg, “Electronic Warfare Funding Up, But Short of DSB Marker,” Breaking Defense, November 28, 2018, accessed at https://breakingdefense.com/2018/11/electronic-warfare-funding-up-still-short-of-dsb-recommendation/. 30 For example, the F/A-18 Hornet is currently upgrading its Infrared Search and Track (IRST) system to better enable the aircraft to operate in contested environments. There is currently RDT&E funding associated with this program; however, there is only a single procurement line item for the F/A-18 Hornet, which does not disclose what allocations of funds are used for procuring new airframes versus new avionics and components. 31 P.L. 115-232, §255. 32 P.L. 115-232, §255. 33 Bryan Clark, Whitney M. McNamara, and Timothy A. Walton, Winning the Invisible War: Gaining an Enduring U.S. Advantage in the Electromagnetic Spectrum, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, Washington, DC, November 20, 2019, https://csbaonline.org/research/publications/winning-the-invisible-war-gaining-an-enduring-u.s-advantage-in-the-electromagnetic-spectrum. 34 P.L. 115-232, §1053. 35 P.L. 115-232, §1053. U.S. Military Electronic Warfare Program Funding: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service R45756 · VERSION 3 · UPDATED 16 Author Information John R. Hoehn Analyst in Military Capabilities and Programs Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 		2020-04-16T15:15:28-0400
Defense Primer: RDT&E https://crsreports.congress.gov Updated April 29, 2020Defense Primer: RDT&EAdvanced technology plays a critical role in ensuring U.S. national security. To maintain technological superiority on the battlefield, the Department of Defense (DOD) relies on scientific and technical knowledge developed in large measure through research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E) funded by the department and performed by industry, universities, federal laboratories, and others. DOD also relies increasingly on technology developed by the private sector for commercial markets. This In Focus describes DOD’s RDT&E appropriations structure and funding levels. DOD appropriations are provided annually through the defense appropriations act, one of the 12 regular appropriations acts. DOD RDT&E funding is generally provided in four of this act’s titles (see box). Congress also sometimes provides DOD RDT&E funding through supplemental appropriations acts. DOD reports FY2020 total obligational authority (enacted) of $108.6 billion. RDT&E by Organization RDT&E Appropriations Under Title IV Approximately 97% of DOD’s RDT&E funding is appropriated in Title IV (Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation), which includes appropriations for the Army, Navy, Air Force, Space Force, a Defense-wide RDT&E account, and the Director of Operational Test and Evaluation. Space Force is a new account included in the FY2021 request. The Defense-wide account includes the Missile Defense Agency (MDA), Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), Office of the Secretary of Defense, and 15 other DOD organizations. Within each of these accounts are program elements (PEs) that provide funding for particular activities. RDT&E Under Other Titles RDT&E funds are also appropriated for programs in other titles of the defense appropriations act. For example, RDT&E funds are also appropriated in Title VI as part of the Chemical Agents and Munitions Destruction Program, the Defense Health Program, and the Inspector General. In some years, RDT&E funds are also provided in Title V as part of the National Defense Sealift Fund. In some years, RDT&E funds have also been appropriated in Title IX as part of DOD’s funding for Overseas Contingency Operations (OCO). Typically, the RDT&E funds appropriated for OCO activities support specified PEs in Title IV, though they are requested and accounted for separately. Alternatively, they may be provided to a transfer fund. Congress establishes transfer funds for a particular purpose, and may authorize DOD to transfer a portion of these funds to other accounts, such as RDT&E, to help achieve that purpose. Defense Appropriations Act Titles That Fund RDT&E Title IV: Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation  Army  Navy  Air Force  Space Force  Defense-wide  Operational Test and Evaluation Title V: Revolving and Management Funds  National Defense Sealift Fund Title VI: Other Defense Programs  Chemical Agents and Munitions Destruction  Defense Health Program  Inspector General Title IX: Overseas Contingency Operations  Any of the above  Transfer Funds RDT&E by Character of Work While DOD Title IV funds are appropriated only by organization, DOD budget justifications and congressional appropriations reports and explanatory statements also typically describe this funding by the character of the work to be performed. This characterization consists of eight categories, each with a budget activity code (6.1 through 6.8) and a description. (See Table 1.) Table 1. DOD RDT&E Budget Activity Codes Code Description 6.1 Basic Research 6.2 Applied Research 6.3 Advanced Technology Development 6.4 Adv. Component Development and Prototypes 6.5 System Development and Demonstration 6.6 RDT&E Management Support 6.7 Operational Systems Development 6.8 Software and Digital Technology Pilot Programs Source: Department of Defense, Financial Management Regulation (DoD 7000.14-R), Volume 2B, November 2017. Funding in codes 6.1 to 6.3 is referred to by DOD as the science and technology (S&T) budget. This portion of DOD RDT&E is often singled out for attention by analysts, as it is seen as the pool of knowledge necessary for the development of future military systems. In contrast, 6.4, 6.5, and 6.7 funds are focused on the application of existing scientific and technical knowledge to meet current or near-term operational needs. The funds in 6.6 are for RDT&E management and support work in any of the other RDT&E budget accounts. DOD added budget activity 6.8 in its Defense Primer: RDT&E https://crsreports.congress.gov FY2021 budget request; no description was available at time of publication. Within the S&T program, basic research (6.1) receives special attention, particularly by the nation’s universities. DOD spends nearly half of its basic research budget at universities. DOD is a substantial source of funds for university R&D in certain fields, such as aerospace, aeronautical, and astronautical engineering (40%); electrical, electronic, and communications engineering (40%); industrial and manufacturing engineering (29%); mechanical engineering (28%); and metallurgical and materials engineering (24%); and computer and information sciences (30%). Funding Profile of DOD RDT&E Total DOD RDT&E for FY2020 is $108.6 billion, of which Title IV and Title IX (OCO) funding accounts for $105.4 billion (97.0%). (See Figure 1.) Figure 1. Title IV/Title IX (OCO) Share of Total DOD RDT&E, FY2020 Source: CRS analysis of FY2021 DOD R-1. Note: Percentages may not add to 100% due to rounding. The composition of FY2020 DOD RDT&E provided by Title IV and Title IX (OCO) is shown by organization in Figure 2. Figure 2. Title IV and Title IX (OCO) RDT&E by Organization, FY2020 Source: CRS analysis of FY2021 DOD R-1. Note: Percentages may not add to 100% due to rounding; dollar figure may not sum to total due to rounding Figure 3 illustrates FY2020 Title IV and Title IX (OCO) RDT&E funding by character of work. DOD S&T funding (6.1-6.3) accounted for $16.12 billion (15.3%) of this funding. RDT&E funds provided in other DOD appropriations titles and supplemental acts are not included in this analysis as they are not parsed by character of work. Figure 3. Title IV and Title IX (OCO) RDT&E by Character of Work, FY2020 Budget authority, in billions of current dollars Source: CRS analysis of FY2021 DOD R-1. Note: Percentages may not add to 100% due to rounding. Funding for the Director of Operational Test and Evaluation is included in 6.6; funding for classified research is included in 6.7. There is no funding for 6.8 in FY2020. Relevant Statutes Title 10, U.S. Code, Chapter 139—Research and Development Title 10, U.S. Code, Chapter133—Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics Title 10, U.S. Code, Chapter138(b)(8)—Assistant Secretaries of Defense–Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering) CRS Products CRS Report R44711, Department of Defense Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation (RDT&E): Appropriations Structure, by John F. Sargent Jr. CRS Report R45715, Federal Research and Development (R&D) Funding: FY2020, coordinated by John F. Sargent Jr. CRS Report R45403, The Global Research and Development Landscape and Implications for the Department of Defense, by John F. Sargent Jr. and Marcy E. Gallo. CRS Report R44010, Defense Acquisitions: How and Where DOD Spends Its Contracting Dollars, by John F. Sargent Jr. and Christopher T. Mann. Other Resources Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), DOD Budget Request Department of Defense Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation Programs (R-1), FY2020 John F. Sargent Jr., Specialist in Science and Technology Policy IF10553Defense Primer: RDT&E https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF10553 · VERSION 11 · UPDATED Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. https://crsreports.congress.gov/		2020-04-29T14:05:20-0400
Defense Primer: Department of Defense Civilian Employees https://crsreports.congress.gov April 17, 2020Defense Primer: Department of Defense Civilian EmployeesBackground The foundation for the modern federal civil service, which includes defense civilians, is the statutory Merit System Principles found in Title 5 of the U.S. Code. The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) oversees the system. Historically, by the 1830s, challenges in hiring and managing government civilians had become severe when the spoils system, in which each presidential administration replaced the federal workforce with its political supporters or party members, sparked increased interest in reform. Post-civil war efforts to eliminate the spoils system were underway in the Congress when a catalyst for immediate change arose from President Garfield’s assassination in 1881 by a disgruntled supporter who was denied a job in the President’s administration. Beginning in 1883, the Congress periodically passed civil service reform bills for almost a century before establishing the current federal civil service in 1978. Federal Employment DOD civilians are appointed to the federal civil service to perform a federal function under the supervision of another federal employee or an appropriate federal official. DOD may employ individuals in the various federal civil service employment classes consistent with its yearly appropriation for direct hire employees. Indirect-hire, government contractor, and non-appropriated fund employees are not members of the federal civil service. DOD civilians may exercise management or supervisory authority over servicemembers when authorized, but they do not have command or military justice authority over them. Civil Service Employee Classification There are three classes of federal civil service appointments under Title 5 of the U.S. Code: competitive service, excepted service, and senior executive service (SES). The competitive service consists of all federal civil service positions that are not specifically excluded by OPM, statute, or the President. The majority of federal employees and over 80 percent of DOD civilians are appointed in the competitive service. The excepted service consists of all federal civil service positions that are not included in the competitive service or SES. SES positions are those with high-level managerial, supervisory, and policy making responsibilities. The SES makes up less than one percent of the federal civil service. A SES position in DOD is often analogous to a flag or general officer military position, but it does not include command authority. Civil Service Authority and Oversight The general law governing DOD civilians is found in Titles 5 and 29 of the U.S. Code, and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, among others, and their associated federal regulations. Title 5 identifies 14 Prohibited Personnel Practices which complement the Merit System Principles. Some of the federal entities overseeing most DOD civilians include the  Office of Personnel Management (OPM);  Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB);  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC);  Federal Labor Relations Authority (FLRA); and  Office of Special Counsel (OSC). The FLRA oversees DOD civilians who are members of a collective bargaining unit (union). Because OPM does not typically have jurisdiction over elements of the U.S. Intelligence Community (IC), OSC does not have jurisdiction over IC elements in DOD and, with the exception of preference eligible veterans with more than one year of federal civilian service, MSPB does not have jurisdiction over the DOD civilian intelligence workforce. Specific law and policies governing DOD civilians are found in Title 10 of the U.S. Code and defense or military department directives, instructions, and manuals. The DOD official with direct responsibility for DOD civilians is the Undersecretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness (USD(P&R)), who also serves as DOD’s Chief Human Capital Officer (CHCO) (10 U.S.C. §136; 5 U.S.C. §1402). Civilians DOD appropriates funds each year for DOD civilians based on the number of direct-hire Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) units needed to meet its requirements (1 unit equals 2080 hours per year). The actual number of DOD civilians typically fluctuates from the budgeted FTE number. The Defense Manpower Data Center (DMDC) reported 755,386 total DOD civilians as of September 30, 2019. Table 1 includes the FY2020 authorized and FY2021 requested DOD FTE units. Table 1. DOD Direct-Hire FTE DOD Component FY2020 Authorized FY2021 Requested Percent Change Defense 217,300 210,400 -4.00% Army 180,800 186,100 2.90% Navy 207,000 208,900 0.90% Air Force 169,800 168,100 -1.00% Total 774,900 773,600 -0.20% Source: DOD Budget Overview for FY2021, p. 2-8, available at https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2021/fy2021_Budget_Request_Overview_Book.pdf. Note: FTE numbers rounded by source. Defense Primer: Department of Defense Civilian Employees https://crsreports.congress.gov Policy DOD personnel policies, procedures, and programs for managing DOD civilians are to be binding on all DOD components. DOD civilians fill positions that do not require military servicemembers. DOD policy mandates that managers of DOD civilians apply merit system principles and prohibits certain personnel practices. DOD civilian policy is to be issued only when necessary to meet DOD unique needs or supplement federal civil service policy (DOD Directives 1400.5, 1400.25). Development Career development models in DOD are to be designed to achieve a flexible and adaptable workforce of competent employees. Developmental assignments are to be available to aspiring civilian leaders to develop the competencies needed to succeed at higher levels of responsibility and to provide advancement opportunities commensurate with ability. These assignments are to be made throughout DOD, in other federal agencies, and with private industry. Unions In 1978, Congress found that labor organizations and collective bargaining in the federal civil service are in the public interest and concluded that unions contribute to the effective conduct of public business (5 U.S.C. §7101). DOD intelligence, law enforcement, and other designated employee categories are excluded from bargaining units by statute or executive order. Managers and supervisors in any employee category, and servicemembers, are specifically excluded by statute (5 U.S.C. §7103). Excepted Service Excepted service appointments to the federal civil service are not subject to the competitive service requirements prescribed by OPM or Title 5 of the U.S. Code. Such appointments are made throughout DOD and across the federal government. DOD has additional authority to make excepted service appointments to the federal civil service, under Title 10 of the U.S. Code, for a designated system, service, workforce, or position, such as those discussed below. DOD Civilian Intelligence Personnel System The Defense Civilian Intelligence Personnel System (DCIPS) is a human resource system, independent from OPM, established in Sections 1601-1623 of Title 10 of the U.S. Code. DCIPS is the exclusive system for DOD civilians serving in intelligence and security positons. A DCIPS objective was to make the DOD intelligence and security enterprise an employer of choice for top talent. The Undersecretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)) exercises overall supervision and policy oversight for DCIPS, subject to coordination with the USD(P&R). DCIPS has several features that distinguish it from the general civil service system. Two of them include the authority for DOD intelligence organizations to establish a pay-banding and rank-in-person workforce. This allows competitive qualification for a pay-level commensurate with one’s performance and responsibilities without rigid time in service requirements (pay-band), and retention of pay-level regardless of the position to which one is assigned (rank-in-person). DOD Cyber Excepted Service Section 1599f of Title 10, U.S. Code, authorizes DOD to establish positions in the excepted service for carrying out the responsibilities of U.S. Cyber Command. This authority includes individual pay setting for a DOD civilian required to perform, manage, or supervise U.S. Cyber Command operations. Compensation under this authority is to be designed to attract and retain civilians with highly sought cyber skills needed for DOD cyber operations. DOD Civilian Acquisition Workforce Section 1762 of Title 10 of the U.S. Code authorizes DOD to establish a demonstration project for a DOD civilian acquisition workforce. The DOD civilian acquisition workforce includes all DOD civilians occupying designated defense acquisition positions. Table 2 includes the current civilian acquisition workforce total and component populations. A defense acquisition position is one that requires greater than 50 percent of its responsibilities to be acquisition functions. Section 4703 of Title 5 of the U.S. Code allows DOD to apply recruitment, appointment, and pay setting practices for the demonstration project positions that differ from those that apply to the general civil service system. Implemented in 1999, the project’s outcome after its termination in 2023 is expected to allow DOD to determine whether its modifications for improving the human resource management of the DOD civilian acquisition workforce should be permanent. Table 2. DOD Civilian Acquisition Workforce DOD Component Inside U.S. Outside U.S. Component Total Army 12,039 230 12,269 Navy 7,228 20 7,248 Marine Corps 1,855 1 1,856 Air Force 19,416 96 19,512 Defense 5,248 54 5,302 AcqDemo Total 45,786 401 46,187 Source: AcqDemo, https://acqdemo.hci.mil/demographics.html (accessed April 4, 2020). DOD Designated Positions Certain provisions in Title 10 of the U.S. Code allow DOD to appoint civilians into designated excepted service positions, such as experts at departmental laboratories and faculty at service colleges and service academies. Senior Executive Service DOD manages members of the SES as a cohort through a career lifecycle, which includes selection, training, and assignments. DOD integrates the SES with its political appointee and general and flag officer leadership. The SES in DOD is to be designed for civilian leaders who possess the skill and experience needed to support its warfighting role and meet its management requirements. Alan Ott, Analyst in Defense and Intelligence Personnel Policy IF11510Defense Primer: Department of Defense Civilian Employees https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF11510 · VERSION 2 · NEW Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. https://crsreports.congress.gov/		2020-04-20T14:05:50-0400
U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Updated April 27, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov RL33640 U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service Summary Even though the United States has reduced the number of warheads deployed on its long-range missiles and bombers, consistent with the terms of the 2010 New START Treaty, it is also developing new delivery systems for deployment over the next 10-30 years. The 116th Congress will continue to review these programs, and the funding requested for them, during the annual authorization and appropriations process. During the Cold War, the U.S. nuclear arsenal contained many types of delivery vehicles for nuclear weapons. The longer-range systems, which included long-range missiles based on U.S. territory, long-range missiles based on submarines, and heavy bombers that could threaten Soviet targets from their bases in the United States, are known as strategic nuclear delivery vehicles. At the end of the Cold War, in 1991, the United States deployed more than 10,000 warheads on these delivery vehicles. With the implementation of New START completed in February 2018, the United States is limited to 1,550 accountable warheads on these delivery vehicles, a restriction that will remain in place at least through 2021, while New START Treaty remains in force. At the present time, the U.S. land-based ballistic missile force (ICBMs) consists of 400 land-based Minuteman III ICBMs, each deployed with one warhead, spread among a total of 450 operational launchers. This force is consistent with the New START Treaty. The Air Force has modernized the Minuteman missiles, replacing and upgrading their rocket motors, guidance systems, and other components, so that they can remain in the force through 2030. It has initiated a program to replace the missiles with a new Ground-based Strategic Deterrent around 2029. The U.S. ballistic missile submarine fleet currently consists of 14 Trident submarines. Each can carry 20 Trident II (D-5) missiles—a reduction from 24 missiles per submarine—with the total meeting the launcher limits in the New START Treaty. The Navy converted 4 of the original 18 Trident submarines to carry nonnuclear cruise missiles. Nine of the submarines are deployed in the Pacific Ocean and five are in the Atlantic. The Navy also has undertaken efforts to extend the life of the missiles and warheads so that they and the submarines can remain in the fleet past 2020. It has designed and is beginning production of the new Columbia class submarine that will replace the existing fleet beginning in 2031. The U.S. fleet of heavy bombers includes 20 B-2 bombers and 40 nuclear-capable B-52 bombers. The B-1 bomber is no longer equipped for nuclear missions. This fleet of 60 nuclear-capable aircraft is consistent with the U.S. obligations under New START. The Air Force has begun to retire the nuclear-armed cruise missiles carried by B-52 bombers, leaving only about half the B-52 fleet equipped to carry nuclear weapons. The Air Force plans to procure both a new long-range bomber, known as the B-21, and a new long-range standoff (LRSO) cruise missile during the 2020s. DOE is also modifying and extending the life of the B61 bomb carried on B-2 bombers and fighter aircraft and the W80 warhead for cruise missiles. The Obama Administration completed a review of the size and structure of the U.S. nuclear force, and a review of U.S. nuclear employment policy, in June 2013. This review advised the force structure that the United States has deployed under the New START Treaty. The Trump Administration completed its review of U.S. nuclear forces in February 2018, and reaffirmed the basic contours of the current U.S. force structure and the ongoing modernization programs. The Trump Administration has also funded development of a new low-yield warhead for deployment on Trident II (D-5) missiles. Congress will review the Administration’s plans for U.S. strategic nuclear forces during the annual authorization and appropriations process, and as it assesses the costs of these plans in the current fiscal environment. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Background: The Strategic Triad ..................................................................................................... 3 Force Structure and Size During the Cold War ......................................................................... 3 Force Structure and Size After the Cold War ............................................................................ 4 Current and Future Force Structure and Size ............................................................................ 7 Strategic Nuclear Delivery Vehicles: Post-Cold War Reductions and Current Modernization Programs .............................................................................................................. 9 Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs) ............................................................................. 9 Peacekeeper (MX) .............................................................................................................. 9 Minuteman III ................................................................................................................... 10 Minuteman Modernization Programs ............................................................................... 13 Ground-Based Strategic Deterrent (GBSD) ...................................................................... 17 Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missiles .................................................................................. 22 The SSGN Program .......................................................................................................... 23 The Backfit Program ......................................................................................................... 23 Basing Changes ................................................................................................................. 24 Warhead Loadings ............................................................................................................ 25 Modernization Plans and Programs .................................................................................. 25 The Columbia Class Submarine ........................................................................................ 30 Bombers .................................................................................................................................. 34 B-1 Bomber ....................................................................................................................... 34 B-2 Bomber ....................................................................................................................... 35 B-52 Bomber ..................................................................................................................... 38 B-21 Bomber ..................................................................................................................... 43 Sustaining the Nuclear Weapons Enterprise............................................................................ 45 Issues for Congress ........................................................................................................................ 48 Force Size ................................................................................................................................ 48 Force Structure ........................................................................................................................ 50 The Cost of Nuclear Weapons ................................................................................................. 55 Figures Figure 1. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Weapons: 1960-1990 ................................................................... 3 Figure 2. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: 1991-2020 ....................................................................... 5 Tables Table 1. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces Under START I and START II .......................................... 6 Table 2. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces under New START ............................................................ 8 Contacts Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 57 U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction During the Cold War, the U.S. nuclear arsenal contained many types of delivery vehicles for nuclear weapons. These included short-range missiles and artillery for use on the battlefield, medium-range missiles and aircraft that could strike targets beyond the theater of battle, short- and medium-range systems based on surface ships, long-range missiles based on U.S. territory and submarines, and heavy bombers that could threaten Soviet targets from their bases in the United States. The short- and medium-range systems are considered nonstrategic nuclear weapons and have been referred to as battlefield, tactical, and theater nuclear weapons. The long-range missiles and heavy bombers are known as strategic nuclear delivery vehicles. In 1990, as the Cold War was drawing to a close and the Soviet Union entered its final year, the United States had more than 12,000 nuclear warheads deployed on 1,875 strategic nuclear delivery vehicles.1 As of July 1, 2009, according to the counting rules in the original Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START), the United States had reduced to 5,916 nuclear warheads on 1,188 strategic nuclear delivery vehicles.2 Under the terms of the 2002 Strategic Offensive Reduction Treaty (known as the Moscow Treaty) between the United States and Russia, this number was to decline to no more than 2,200 operationally deployed strategic nuclear warheads by the end of 2012. The U.S. Department of State reported that the United States had reached that level, with only 1,968 operationally deployed strategic warheads in December 2009.3 The New START Treaty, signed by President Obama and Russia’s President Medvedev on April 8, 2010, reduced those forces further, to no more than 1,550 warheads on deployed launchers and heavy bombers.4 According to the U.S. Department of State, on March 1, 2020, the United States had 1,372 warheads on 655 deployed ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers, within a total of 800 deployed and nondeployed ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers.5 Although these numbers do not count the same categories of nuclear weapons, they indicate that the number of deployed warheads on U.S. strategic nuclear forces has declined significantly in the decades following the end of the Cold War. Yet, nuclear weapons continue to play a key role in U.S. national security strategy, and the United States does not, at this time, plan to either eliminate its nuclear weapons or abandon the strategy of nuclear deterrence that has served as a core concept in U.S. national security strategy for more than 60 years. In a speech in Prague on April 5, 2009, President Obama highlighted “America’s commitment to seek the peace and security of a world without nuclear weapons.” But he recognized that this goal would not be reached quickly, and probably not in his lifetime.6 And, even though President Obama pledged to 1 Natural Resources Defense Council. Table of U.S. Strategic Offensive Force Loadings. Archive of Nuclear Data. http://www.nrdc.org/nuclear/nudb/datab1.asp. The same source indicates that the Soviet Union, in 1990, had just over 11,000 warheads on 2,332 strategic nuclear delivery vehicles. 2 Russia, by the same accounting, had 3,909 warheads on 814 delivery vehicles. See U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Verification, Compliance and Inspection. Fact Sheet. START Aggregate Numbers of Strategic Offensive Weapons. October 1, 2009. Washington, DC. 3 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Public Affairs, The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty: Promoting Disarmament, Washington, DC, April 27, 2010, http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/141497.pdf. 4 The parties are to meet this limit within seven years of entry-into-force, which could occur in early 2011. For more information on the New START Treaty, see CRS Report R41219, The New START Treaty: Central Limits and Key Provisions, by Amy F. Woolf. 5 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of State, Bureau of Arms Control, Verification, and Compliance, New START Treaty Aggregate Numbers of Strategic Offensive Forces, Fact Sheet, Washington, DC, https://www.state.gov/new-start-treaty-aggregate-numbers-of-strategic-offensive-arms-13/. 6 The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Remarks by President Obama, Prague, Czech Republic, April 5, U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 2 reduce the roles and numbers of U.S. nuclear forces, the 2010 Nuclear Posture Review noted that “the fundamental role of U.S. nuclear weapons, which will continue as long as nuclear weapons exist, is to deter nuclear attack on the United States, our allies, and partners.”7 Moreover, in the 2010 NPR and in the June 2013 Report on the Nuclear Employment Guidance of the United States,8 the Obama Administration indicated that the United States would pursue programs that would allow it to modernize and adjust its strategic forces so that they remained capable in coming years. The Trump Administration emphasized its continuing support for the U.S. nuclear arsenal in its Nuclear Posture Review, which it released on February 2, 2018. This document notes that “the current threat environment and future uncertainties now necessitate a national commitment to maintain modern and effective nuclear forces, as well as the infrastructure needed to support them.”9 The report not only reaffirms the basic contours of the current U.S. force structure and the ongoing modernization programs, it also calls for the development of a new low-yield warhead for deployment on Trident II (D-5) missiles. Most Members of Congress have supported the general contours of U.S. nuclear posture. While some programs have been open to scrutiny, Congress has continued to support funding for most aspects of the ongoing modernization programs. Nevertheless, questions about the costs of these programs, and the trade-offs they might require within the defense budget, surfaced after Congress passed the Budget Control Act in 2011. These concerns, along with questions about the rationale for some of the modernization programs, have additional attention in the 116th Congress. While Senator James Inhofe, who chairs the Senate Armed Services Committee, has offered strong support for the nuclear modernization programs, Representative Adam Smith, who chairs the House Armed Services Committee, has noted that “the current $1.5 trillion plan to build new nuclear weapons and upgrade our nuclear weapons complex is unrealistic and unaffordable.” Congress may again address questions about the costs of the nuclear modernization programs, and the possible trade-offs with other defense priorities, as the Pentagon absorbs the costs of responding to the Covid-19 crisis and possibly alters its procurement and readiness priorities. This report reviews the ongoing programs that will affect the expected size and shape of the U.S. strategic nuclear force structure. It begins with an overview of this force structure during the Cold War, and summarizes the reductions and changes that have occurred since 1991. It then offers details about each category of delivery vehicle—land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs), and heavy bombers—focusing on their current deployments and ongoing and planned modernization programs. The report concludes with a discussion of issues related to decisions about the future size and shape of the U.S. strategic nuclear force. 2009, https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/remarks-president-barack-obama-prague-delivered. 7 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, April 6, 2010, p. 15, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/features/defenseReviews/NPR/2010_Nuclear_Posture_Review_Report.pdf. 8 https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a590745.pdf. 9 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, p. 2, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 3 Background: The Strategic Triad Force Structure and Size During the Cold War Since the early 1960s the United States has maintained a “triad” of strategic nuclear delivery vehicles. The United States first developed these three types of nuclear delivery vehicles, in large part, because each of the military services wanted to play a role in the U.S. nuclear arsenal. However, during the 1960s and 1970s, analysts developed a more reasoned rationale for the nuclear “triad.” They argued that these different basing modes had complementary strengths and weaknesses. They would enhance deterrence and discourage a Soviet first strike because they complicated Soviet attack planning and ensured the survivability of a significant portion of the U.S. force in the event of a Soviet first strike.10 The different characteristics might also strengthen the credibility of U.S. targeting strategy. For example, ICBMs eventually had the accuracy and prompt responsiveness needed to attack hardened targets such as Soviet command posts and ICBM silos, SLBMs had the survivability needed to complicate Soviet efforts to launch a disarming first strike and to retaliate if such an attack were attempted,11 and heavy bombers could be dispersed quickly and launched to enhance their survivability, and they could be recalled to their bases if a crisis did not escalate into conflict. Figure 1. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Weapons: 1960-1990 Source: Natural Resources Defense Council, Archive of Nuclear Data. Figure 1 displays the increases in delivery vehicles and warheads in the U.S. force structure between 1960, when the United States first began to deploy ICBMs, and 1990, the year before the United States and Soviet Union signed the first Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START). According to unclassified estimates, these numbers grew steadily through the mid-1960s, with the 10 Department of Defense. Annual Report to Congress, Fiscal Year 1989, by Frank Carlucci, Secretary of Defense. February 18, 1988. Washington, DC, 1988. p. 54. 11 In the early 1990s, SLBMs also acquired the accuracy needed to attack many hardened sites in the former Soviet Union. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 4 greatest number of delivery vehicles, 2,268, deployed in 1967. The number then held relatively steady through 1990, at between 1,875 and 2,200 ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers. The number of warheads carried on these delivery vehicles increased sharply through 1975, then, after a brief pause, again rose sharply in the early 1980s, peaking at around 13,600 warheads in 1987. The sharp increase in warheads in the early 1970s reflects the deployment of ICBMs and SLBMs with multiple warheads, known as MIRVs (multiple independent reentry vehicles). In particular, the United States began to deploy the Minuteman III ICBM, with 3 warheads on each missile, in 1970, and the Poseidon SLBM, which could carry 10 warheads on each missile, in 1971.12 The increase in warheads in the mid-1980s reflects the deployment of the Peacekeeper (MX) ICBM, which carried 10 warheads on each missile. In 1990, before it concluded the START Treaty with the Soviet Union, the United States deployed a total of around 12,304 warheads on its ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers. The ICBM force consisted of single-warhead Minuteman II missiles, 3-warhead Minuteman III missiles, and 10-warhead Peacekeeper (MX) missiles, for a total force of 2,450 warheads on 1,000 missiles. The submarine force included Poseidon submarines with Poseidon C-3 and Trident I (C-4) missiles, and the Ohio-class Trident submarines with Trident I, and some Trident II (D-5) missiles. The total force consisted of 5,216 warheads on around 600 missiles.13 The bomber force centered on 94 B-52H bombers and 96 B-1 bombers, along with many of the older B-52G bombers and 2 of the new (at the time) B-2 bombers. This force of 260 bombers could carry over 4,648 weapons. Force Structure and Size After the Cold War During the 1990s, the United States reduced the numbers and types of weapons in its strategic nuclear arsenal, both as a part of its modernization process and in response to the limits in the 1991 START Treaty. The United States continued to maintain a triad of strategic nuclear forces, however, with warheads deployed on ICBMs, SLBMs, and bombers. According to the Department of Defense, this mix of forces not only offered the United States a range of capabilities and flexibility in nuclear planning and complicated an adversary’s attack planning, but also hedged against unexpected problems in any single delivery system. This latter issue became more of a concern in this time period, as the United States retired many of the different types of warheads and missiles that it had deployed over the years, reducing the redundancy in its force. The 1991 START Treaty limited the United States to a maximum of 6,000 total warheads, and 4,900 warheads on ballistic missiles, deployed on up to 1,600 strategic offensive delivery vehicles. However, the treaty did not count the actual number of warheads deployed on each type of ballistic missile or bomber. Instead, it used “counting rules” to determine how many warheads would count against the treaty’s limits. For ICBMs and SLBMs, this number usually equaled the actual number of warheads deployed on the missile. Bombers, however, used a different system. Bombers that were not equipped to carry air-launched cruise missiles (the B-1 and B-2 bombers) counted as one warhead; bombers equipped to carry air-launched cruise missiles (B-52 bombers) could carry 20 missiles, but would only count as 10 warheads against the treaty limits. These rules have led to differing estimates of the numbers of warheads on U.S. strategic nuclear forces 12 GlobalSecurity.org LGM Minuteman III History and Poseidon C-3 History. http://www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/systems/lgm-30_3-hist.htm and http://www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/systems/c-3.htm. 13 The older Poseidon submarines were in the process of being retired, and the number of missiles and warheads in the submarine fleet dropped quickly in the early 1990s, to around 2,688 warheads on 336 missiles by 1993. See Natural Resources Defense Council. Table of U.S. Strategic Offensive Force Loadings. Archive of Nuclear Data. http://www.nrdc.org/nuclear/nudb/datab1.asp. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 5 during the 1990s; some estimates count only those warheads that count against the treaty while others count all the warheads that could be carried by the deployed delivery systems. According to unclassified data, the United States reduced its nuclear weapons from 9,300 warheads on 1,239 delivery vehicles in 1991 to 6,196 warheads on 1,064 delivery vehicles when it completed the implementation of START in 2001. By 2009, the United States had reduced its forces to approximately 2,200 warheads on around 850 delivery vehicles. According to the U.S. Department of State, as of December 2009, the United States had 1,968 operationally deployed warheads on its strategic offensive nuclear forces.14 The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, in its Nuclear Notebook, estimated that these numbers held steady in 2010, prior to New START’s entry into force, then began to decline again, falling to around 1,750 warheads on around 750 delivery vehicles by 2019, as the United States implemented the reductions mandated by New START (this total includes weapons that the U.S. Department of State does not count in the New START force).15 These numbers appear in Figure 2. Figure 2. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: 1991-2020 Source: Natural Resources Defense Council, Archive of Nuclear Data, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, Nuclear Notebook. During the 1990s, the United States continued to add to its Trident fleet, reaching a total of 18 submarines. It retired all of its remaining Poseidon submarines and all of the single-warhead Minuteman II missiles. It continued to deploy B-2 bombers, reaching a total of 21, and removed some of the older B-52G bombers from the nuclear fleet. Consequently, in 2001, its warheads were deployed on 18 Trident submarines with 24 missiles on each submarine and 6 or 8 warheads on each missile; 500 Minuteman III ICBMs, with up to 3 warheads on each missile; 50 Peacekeeper (MX) missiles, with 10 warheads on each missile; 94 B-52H bombers, with up to 20 cruise missiles on each bomber; and 21 B-2 bombers with up to 16 bombs on each aircraft. The United States and Russia signed a second START Treaty in early 1993. Under this treaty, the United States would have had to reduce its strategic offensive nuclear weapons to between 3,000 and 3,500 accountable warheads. In 1994, the Department of Defense decided that, to meet this limit, it would deploy a force of 500 Minuteman III ICBMs with 1 warhead on each missile, 14 Trident submarines with 24 missiles on each submarine and 5 warheads on each missile, 76 B-52 bombers, and 21 B-2 bombers. The Air Force was to eliminate 50 Peacekeeper ICBMs and 14 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Verification, Compliance, and Implementation, The Legacy of START and Related U.S. Policies, Fact Sheet, Washington, DC, July 16, 2009, http://www.state.gov/t/avc/rls/126119.htm. 15 Hans M. Kristensen and Robert S. Norris, “U.S. Nuclear Forces, 2015,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, March 2015. http://bos.sagepub.com/content/71/2/107.full.pdf+html. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 6 reorient the B-1 bombers to nonnuclear missions; the Navy would retire 4 Trident submarines (it later decided to convert these submarines to carry conventional weapons). The START II Treaty never entered into force, and Congress prevented the Clinton Administration from reducing U.S. forces unilaterally to START II limits. Nevertheless, the Navy and Air Force continued to plan for the forces described above, and eventually implemented those changes. Table 1 displays the forces the United States had deployed in 2001, after completing the START I reductions. It also includes those that it would have deployed under START II, in accordance with the 1994 decisions. Table 1. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces Under START I and START II System Deployed under START I (2001) Planned for START II Launchers Accountable Warheadsa Launchers Accountable Warheads Minuteman III ICBMs 500 1,200 500 500 Peacekeeper ICBMs 50 500 0 0 Trident I Missiles 168 1,008 0 0 Trident II Missiles 264 2,112 336 1,680 B-52 H Bombers (ALCM) 97 970 76 940 B-52 H Bombers (non-ALCM) 47 47 0 0 B-1 Bombersb 90 90 0 0 B-2 Bombers 20 20 21 336 Total 1,237 5,948 933 3,456 Source: U.S. Department of State and CRS estimates. a. Under START I, bombers that are not equipped to carry ALCMs count as one warhead, even if they can carry up 16 nuclear bombs; bombers that are equipped to carry ALCMs count as 10 warheads, even if they can carry up to 20 ALCMs. b. Although they still counted under START I, B-1 bombers are no longer equipped for nuclear missions. The George W. Bush Administration stated in late 2001 that the United States would reduce its strategic nuclear forces to 1,700-2,200 “operationally deployed warheads” over the next decade.16 This goal was codified in the 2002 Moscow Treaty. According to the Bush Administration, operationally deployed warheads were those deployed on missiles and stored near bombers on a day-to-day basis. They are the warheads that would be available immediately, or in a matter of days, to meet “immediate and unexpected contingencies.”17 The Administration also indicated that the United States would retain a triad of ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers for the foreseeable future. It did not, however, offer a rationale for this traditional “triad,” although the points raised in the past about the differing and complementary capabilities of the systems probably still pertain. Admiral James Ellis, the former Commander of the U.S. Strategic Command (STRATCOM), highlighted this when he noted in a 2005 interview that the ICBM 16 President Bush announced the U.S. intention to reduce its forces on November 13, 2001, during a summit with Russia’s President Vladimir Putin. The United States and Russia codified these reductions in a Treaty signed in May 2002. See CRS Report RL31448, Nuclear Arms Control: The Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty, by Amy F. Woolf. 17 U.S. Senate. Committee on Armed Services. Statement of the Honorable Douglas J. Feith, Under Secretary of Defense For Policy. February 14, 2002. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 7 force provides responsiveness, the SLBM force provides survivability, and bombers provide flexibility and recall capability.18 The Bush Administration did not specify how it would reduce the U.S. arsenal from around 6,000 warheads to the lower level of 2,200 operationally deployed warheads, although it did identify some force structure changes that would account for part of the reductions. Specifically, after Congress removed its restrictions,19 the United States eliminated the 50 Peacekeeper ICBMs, reducing by 500 the total number of operationally deployed ICBM warheads. It also continued with plans to remove four Trident submarines from service, and converted those ships to carry nonnuclear guided missiles. These submarines would have counted as 476 warheads under the START Treaty’s rules. These changes reduced U.S. forces to around 5,000 warheads on 950 delivery vehicles in 2006; this reduction appears in Figure 2. The Bush Administration also noted that two of the Trident submarines remaining in the fleet would be in overhaul at any given time. The warheads that could be carried on those submarines would not count against the Moscow Treaty limits because they would not be “operationally deployed.” This would further reduce the U.S. deployed force by 200 to 400 warheads. The Bush Administration, through the 2005 Strategic Capabilities Assessment and 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review, announced additional changes in U.S. ICBMs, SLBMs, and bomber forces; these included the elimination of 50 Minuteman III missiles and several hundred air-launched cruise missiles. (These are discussed in more detail below.) These changes appeared to be sufficient to reduce the number of operationally deployed warheads enough to meet the treaty limit of 2,200 warheads, as the United States announced, in mid-2009, that it had met this limit. Reaching this level, however, also depends on the number of warheads carried by each of the remaining Trident and Minuteman missiles.20 Current and Future Force Structure and Size The Obama Administration indicated in the 2010 NPR that the United States would retain a triad of ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers as the United States reduced its forces to the limits in the 2010 New START Treaty. The NPR indicated that the unique characteristics of each leg of the triad were important to the goal of maintaining strategic stability at reduced numbers of warheads: Each leg of the Triad has advantages that warrant retaining all three legs at this stage of reductions. Strategic nuclear submarines (SSBNs) and the SLBMs they carry represent the most survivable leg of the U.S. nuclear Triad…. Single-warhead ICBMs contribute to stability, and like SLBMs are not vulnerable to air defenses. Unlike ICBMs and SLBMs, bombers can be visibly deployed forward, as a signal in crisis to strengthen deterrence of potential adversaries and assurance of allies and partners.21 18 Hebert, Adam. The Future Missile Force. Air Force Magazine. October 2005. 19 Beginning in FY1996, and continuing through the end of the Clinton Administration, Congress had prohibited the use of any DOD funds for the elimination of strategic nuclear delivery vehicles, below START I levels, until START II entered into force. See, for example, the FY1998 Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 105-85, §1302). Congress lifted this restriction in the FY2002 Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 107-107, §1031). 20 “U.S. Meets Moscow Nuclear Reduction Commitment Three Years Early,” Global Security Newswire, February 11, 2009. 21 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, April 6, 2010, p. 22, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/features/defenseReviews/NPR/2010_Nuclear_Posture_Review_Report.pdf. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 8 Moreover, the 2010 NPR noted that “retaining sufficient force structure in each leg to allow the ability to hedge effectively by shifting weight from one Triad leg to another if necessary due to unexpected technological problems or operational vulnerabilities.”22 The Obama Administration continued to support the triad, even as it reduced U.S. nuclear forces under New START and considered whether to reduce U.S. nuclear forces further in the coming years. In April 2013, Madelyn Creedon, then the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Global Security Affairs, stated, “The 2010 nuclear posture review concluded that the United States will maintain a triad of ICBMs, SLBMs, and nuclear capable heavy bombers. And the president‘s F.Y. ‘14 budget request supports modernization of these nuclear forces.”23 Further, in its report on the Nuclear Employment Strategy of the United States, released in June 2013, DOD stated that the United States would maintain a nuclear triad, because this is the best way to “maintain strategic stability at reasonable cost, while hedging against potential technical problems or vulnerabilities.”24 Table 2. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces under New START (Estimated Forces prior to and planned under New START Forces) Estimated Forces, 2010 Planned Forces Under New STARTa Launchers Warheads Total Launchers Deployed Launchers Warheads Minuteman III 450 500 454 400 400 Trident 336 1,152 280 240 1,090 B-52 76 300 46 42 42 B-2 18 200 20 18 18 Total 880 2,152 800 700 1,550 Source: U.S. Department of Defense, Report on Plan to Implement the Nuclear Force Reductions, Limitations, and Verification, Washington, DC, April 8, 2014. a. Under this force the United States will retain 14 Trident submarines with 2 in overhaul. In accordance with the terms of New START, the United States will eliminate 4 launchers on each submarine, so that each counts as only 20 launchers. The United States will also retain all 450 Minuteman III launchers, although only 400 would hold deployed missiles. On April 8, 2014, the Obama Administration released a report detailing the force structure that the United States would deploy under New START. The report indicated that, although the reductions would be complete by the treaty deadline of February 5, 2018, most of the reductions would come late in the treaty implementation period so that the plans could change, if necessary. Table 2, above, displays this force structure and compares it with estimates of U.S. operational strategic nuclear forces in 2010, prior to New START’s entry into force. This force structure is consistent with the statements and adjustments the Administration has made about deploying all Minuteman III missiles with a single warhead, retaining Trident submarines deployed in two oceans, and converting some number of heavy bombers to conventional-only missions. 22 Ibid., p. 20. 23 U.S. Congress, House Armed Forces, Strategic Forces, Hearing on the Proposed Fiscal 2014 Defense Authorization as it Relates to Atomic Energy Defense Activities, 113th Cong., 1st sess., May 9, 2013. 24 Department of Defense, Report on Nuclear Employment Strategy of the United States, Washington, DC, June 2013, p. 5, https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a590745.pdf. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 9 The Trump Administration has continued to adjust the U.S. nuclear force to meet this planned force structure. When the treaty reductions were completed in February 2018, the U.S. Department of State reported that the United States had 1,350 warheads on 652 deployed ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers, within a total of 800 deployed and nondeployed ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers.25 It updated these totals in March 1, 2020, at which time the United States had 1,372 warheads on 655 deployed ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers, within a total of 800 deployed and nondeployed ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers.26 These totals likely exclude one or two Ohio-class submarines that undergoing short-term maintenance; if these were counted in the active force, the number of deployed launchers and deployed warheads is likely reach the New START limits of 700 and 1,550, respectively. Moreover, the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review (NPR) notes that New START will remain in effect through 2021, and that the United States will continue to implement it through that date.27 The NPR also notes that the treaty can be extended for up to five years, through 2026, but United States has not yet decided whether it will support such an extension. As a result, the NPR does not offer any indications of how long the United States will retain a force structure consistent with New START after 2021 or whether the United States would seek to increase or reduce its deployed forces when New START expires. At the same time, the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review reaffirms the U.S. commitment to the nuclear triad and to the modernization programs for each of the components of that force structure. It notes that “the triad’s synergy and overlapping attributes help ensure the enduring survivability of our deterrence capabilities against attack and our capacity to hold a range of adversary targets at risk throughout a crisis or conflict. Eliminating any leg of the triad would greatly ease adversary attack planning and allow an adversary to concentrate resources and attention on defeating the remaining two legs.”28 Strategic Nuclear Delivery Vehicles: Post-Cold War Reductions and Current Modernization Programs Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs) Peacekeeper (MX) In the late 1980s, the United States deployed 50 Peacekeeper ICBMs, each with 10 warheads, at silos that had held Minuteman missiles at F.E. Warren Air Force Base in Wyoming. The 1993 START II Treaty would have banned multiple warhead ICBMs, so the United States would have had to eliminate these missiles while implementing the treaty. Therefore, the Pentagon began planning for their elimination, and the Air Force added funds to its budget for this purpose in 1994. However, beginning in FY1998, Congress prohibited the Clinton Administration from 25 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of State, Bureau of Arms Control, Verification, and Compliance, New START Treaty Aggregate Numbers of Strategic Offensive Forces, Fact Sheet, Washington, DC, https://www.state.gov/t/avc/newstart/278775.htm. 26 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of State, Bureau of Arms Control, Verification, and Compliance, New START Treaty Aggregate Numbers of Strategic Offensive Forces, Fact Sheet, Washington, DC, https://www.state.gov/new-start-treaty-aggregate-numbers-of-strategic-offensive-arms-12/. 27 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, p. 73, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. 28 Ibid., p. 43. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 10 spending any money on the deactivation or retirement of these missiles until START II entered into force. The Bush Administration requested $14 million in FY2002 to begin the missiles’ retirement; Congress lifted the restriction and authorized the funding. The Air Force began to deactivate the missiles in October 2002, and completed the process, having removed all the missiles from their silos, in September 2005. The MK21 reentry vehicles and W87 warheads from these missiles have been placed in storage. As is noted below, the Air Force plans to redeploy some of these warheads and reentry vehicles on Minuteman III missiles, under the Safety Enhanced Reentry Vehicle (SERV) program. Under the terms of the original, 1991 START Treaty, the United States would have had to eliminate the Peacekeeper missile silos to remove the warheads on the missiles from accountability under the treaty limits. However, the Air Force retained the silos as it deactivated the missiles. Therefore, the warheads that were deployed on the Peacekeeper missiles still counted under START, even though the missiles were no longer operational, until START expired in December 2009. The United States did not, however, count any of these warheads under the limits in the Moscow Treaty. The United States has eliminated the empty launchers so that they do not count under the New START Treaty, although it did not, have to blow up or excavate the silos, as it would have had to do under the original START Treaty. The Air Force filled the silos with gravel, and completed the elimination process in February 2015. Minuteman III The U.S. Minuteman III ICBMs are located at three Air Force bases—F.E. Warren AFB in Wyoming, Malmstrom AFB in Montana, and Minot AFB in North Dakota. Each base supports 150 missile silos, but only 400 of the 450 silos currently hold operational missiles. Force Structure Changes In the 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR), the Pentagon indicated that it planned to “reduce the number of deployed Minuteman III ballistic missiles from 500 to 450, beginning in Fiscal Year 2007.”29 The Air Force deactivated the missiles in Malmstrom’s 564th Missile Squadron, which was known as the “odd squad.”30 This designation reflected that the launch control facilities for these missiles were built and installed by General Electric, while all other Minuteman launch control facilities were built by Boeing; as a result, these missiles used a different communications and launch control system than all the other Minuteman missiles. According to Air Force Space Command, the drawdown began on July 1, 2007. All of the reentry vehicles were removed from the missiles in early 2008, the missiles were all removed from their silos by the end of July 2008, and the squadron was deactivated by the end of August 2008.31 In testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee, General Cartwright stated that the Air Force had decided to retire these missiles so that they could serve as test assets for the remaining force. He noted that the Air Force had to “keep a robust test program all the way through the life of the program.”32 With the test assets available before this decision, the test program would begin to run short around 2017 or 2018. The added test assets would support the program through 29 Department of Defense. Report of the 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review. Washington, DC. February 2006. p. 50. 30 Johnson, Peter. Growth Worries Base Boosters. Great Falls Tribune. January 19, 2006. 31 Global Security Newswire. U.S. Deactivates 50 Strategic Missiles. August 4, 2008. 32 U.S. Senate, Committee on Armed Services, Hearing on Global Strike Plans and Programs. Testimony of James E. Cartwright, Commander U.S. Strategic Command. March 29, 2006. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 11 2025 or longer. This time line, however, raised questions about why the Air Force pressed to begin retiring the missiles in FY2007, 10 years before it would run out of test assets. Some speculated that the elimination of the 50 missiles was intended to reduce the long-term operations and maintenance costs for the fleet, particularly since the 564th Squadron used different ground control technologies and training systems than the remainder of the fleet. This option was not likely, however, to produce budgetary savings in the near term as the added cost of deactivating the missiles could exceed the reductions in operations and maintenance expenses.33 In addition, to use these missiles as test assets, the Air Force has had to include them in the modernization programs described below. This has further limited the budgetary savings. When the Air Force decided to retire 50 ICBMs at Malmstrom, it indicated that it would retain the silos and would not destroy or eliminate them. However, with the signing of the New START Treaty in 2010, these silos added to the U.S. total of nondeployed ICBM launchers. The Air Force eliminated them in 2014, by filling them with gravel, so that the United States could comply with the New START limits by 2018. Some in Congress questioned the Administration’s rationale for the plan to retire 50 Minuteman missiles, indicating that it believed that more Minuteman silos increased U.S. security and strengthened deterrence. In the FY2007 Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 5122, §139), Congress stated that DOD could not spend any money to begin the withdrawal of these missiles from the active force until the Secretary of Defense submitted a report that addressed a number of issues, including (1) a detailed justification for the proposal to reduce the force from 500 to 450 missiles; (2) a detailed analysis of the strategic ramifications of continuing to equip a portion of the force with multiple independent warheads rather than single warheads; (3) an assessment of the test assets and spares required to maintain a force of 500 missiles and a force of 450 missiles through 2030; (4) an assessment of whether halting upgrades to the missiles withdrawn from the deployed force would compromise their ability to serve as test assets; and (5) a description of the plan for extending the life of the Minuteman III missile force beyond FY2030. The Secretary of Defense submitted this report to Congress in late March 2007. The question of how many ICBM silos were needed to ensure deterrence returned after the United States signed the New START Treaty. During 2012 and 2013, Congress sought to prevent the Administration from initiating an environmental assessment that would advise the possible elimination of up to 50 silos under New START. In addition, the House Armed Services Committee included a provision in its version of the FY2015 National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 4435, §1634) that would require the Air Force to retain all 450 ICBM silos, regardless of future force structure requirements, budgets, or arms control limits, through 2015. The provision stated that “it is in the national security interests of the United States to retain the maximum number of land-based strategic missile silos and their associated infrastructure to ensure that billions of dollars in prior taxpayer investments for such silos and infrastructure are not lost through precipitous actions which may be budget-driven, cyclical, and not in the long-term strategic interests of the United States.” It required that the Secretary of Defense “preserve each intercontinental ballistic missile silo ... in warm status that enables such silo to—(1) remain a fully functioning element of the interconnected and redundant command and control system of the missile field; and (2) be made fully operational with a deployed missile.” The Air Force has continued to conduct flight tests of the Minuteman III missiles. The live launches use missiles pulled from operational wings at Minot Air Force Base and Malmstrom Air Force Base. During these tests, the missiles fly from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California and 33 Private communication. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 12 deliver a single unarmed warhead to an impact point 4,200 miles (6,759 km) away in the Kwajalein Atoll in the Pacific Ocean.34 While most occur without incident, the Air Force terminated a test in late July 2018 due to an unspecified “anomaly.”35 In the April 2014 report on its planned force structure under New START, the Obama Administration indicated that it planned to retain 400 deployed Minuteman III ICBMs, within a total force of 450 deployed and nondeployed launchers. According to Air Force officials, this option would allow the Air Force to deactivate missiles in silos that have been damaged by water intrusion, repair those silos, and possibly return missiles to them at a later date while it repaired additional silos. If it had eliminated some of the empty silos, it would have had to do so in complete squadrons, regardless of the silos’ conditions, and would not have been able to empty and repair the most degraded silos.36 Congress has also weighed in on this force structure, again arguing that U.S. security would benefit from the retention of more operational ICBM launchers, even if they did not contain operational missiles. The Air Force began to implement this plan in 2013 and, according to the data exchanged under the New START Treaty, had completed the reductions by early June 2017. It now has 400 silos loaded with operational missiles.37 Warhead Plans Each Minuteman III missile was initially deployed with 3 warheads, for a total of 1,500 warheads across the force. In 2001, to meet the START limit of 6,000 warheads, the United States removed 2 warheads from each of the 150 Minuteman missiles at F.E. Warren AFB,38 reducing the Minuteman III force to 1,200 total warheads. In the process, the Air Force also removed and destroyed the “bulkhead,” the platform on the reentry vehicle, so that, in accordance with START rules, these missiles can no longer carry three warheads. Under START II, the United States would have had to download all the Minuteman III missiles to one warhead each. Although the Bush Administration initially endorsed the plan to download all Minuteman ICBMs, this plan apparently changed. In testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee in 2006, General Cartwright, who was then the Commander of STRATCOM, indicated that some Minuteman missiles might carry more than one warhead. Specifically, when discussing the reduction from 500 to 450 missiles, he said, “this is not a reduction in the number of warheads deployed. They will just merely be re-distributed on the missiles.”39 Major General Deppe confirmed that the Air Force would retain some Minuteman III missiles with more than 34 Hans M. Kristensen and Robert S. Norris, “U.S. Nuclear Forces, 2017,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, January 2017, http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00963402.2016.1264213. 35 “Unarmed US missile test flight terminated due to anomaly,” Defense News, July 31, 2018. https://www.defensenews.com/space/2018/07/31/unarmed-us-missile-test-flight-terminated-due-to-anomaly/. 36 Gabe Starosta, “On New START, Timing Begins to Limit Force-Structure Alternatives,” InsideDefense.com, May 14, 2013. 37 Captain Esther Willet, 90th Missile Wing Public Affairs, “AF Meets New START Treaty Requirements,” June 28, 2017, http://www.afgsc.af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/1234307/af-meets-new-start-requirements/. 38 See Robert S. Norris and Hans M. Kristensen. U.S. Nuclear Forces, 2016. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. January/February 2006. 39 See, U.S. Senate, Committee on Armed Services, Hearing on Global Strike Plans and Programs. Testimony of James E. Cartwright, Commander U.S. Strategic Command. March 29, 2006. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 13 one warhead when he noted, in a speech in mid-April 2007, that the remaining 450 Minuteman III missiles could be deployed with one, two, or three warheads.40 In the 2010 NPR, the Obama Administration indicated that, under the New START Treaty, all of the U.S. Minuteman III missiles would carry only one warhead. It indicated that this configuration would “enhance the stability of the nuclear balance by reducing incentives for either side to strike first.”41 The Air Force completed the downloading process, leaving all Minuteman III missiles with a single warhead, on June 16, 2014.42 The 2018 Nuclear Posture Review reaffirmed this deployment, with each Minuteman III missile deployed with one warhead under the New START Treaty. Unlike under START, the United States did not have to alter the front end of the missile or remove the old bulkhead. As a result, the United States could restore warheads to its ICBM force if the international security environment changed. Moreover, this plan could have changed, if, in an effort to reduce the cost of the ICBM force under New START, the Administration had decided to reduce the number of Minuteman III missiles further in the coming years. Reports indicate that the Pentagon may have reviewed such an option as a part of its NPR implementation study, but, as the report released on April 8, 2014, indicated, it did not decide to pursue this approach. As a result, under New START, each of the 400 deployed Minuteman III missiles now carries a single warhead.43 Minuteman Modernization Programs Over the past 20 years, the Air Force pursued several programs that were designed to improve the accuracy and reliability of the Minuteman fleet and to “support the operational capability of the Minuteman ICBM through 2030.” According to some estimates, this effort has cost $6 billion-$7 billion.44 This section describes several of the key programs in this effort. Propulsion Replacement Program (PRP) This program, which began in 1998, replaced the propellant, the solid rocket fuel, in the Minuteman motors to extend the life of the rocket motors. A consortium led by Northrup Grumman poured the new fuel into the first and second stages and remanufactured the third stages of the missiles. According to the Air Force, as of early August, 2007, 325 missiles, or 72% of the fleet, had completed the PRP program; this number increased to around 80% by mid-2008. The Air Force purchased the final 56 booster sets, for a total of 601, with its funding in FY2008. Funding in FY2009 supported the assembly of the remaining boosters. The Air Force completed the PRP program in 2013.45 In the FY2007 Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 109-364) and the 40 Sirak, Michael. Air Force Prepared To Draw Down Minuteman III Fleet by 50 Missiles. Defense Daily. April 17, 2007. 41 Single-warhead ICBMs are considered to be stabilizing because it would take two attacking warheads to destroy the silo. If each side has approximately the same number of warheads, than an attack on a single warhead missile would cost more warheads than it would kill, and, therefore, would not be considered to be lucrative. 42 Jenn Rowell, “Last Malmstron ICBM Reconfigured Under Treaty,” Great Falls Tribune, June 18, 2014. 43 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, p. 45, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. 44 Robert S. Norris and Hans M. Kristensen. U.S. Nuclear Forces, 2006. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. January/February 2006. 45 Sirak, Michael. Minuteman Fleet has Life Beyond 2020, Says Senior Air Force Space Official. Defense Daily. June U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 14 FY2007 Defense Appropriations Act (P.L. 109-289), the 109th Congress indicated that it would not support efforts to end this program early. However, in its budget request for FY2010, the Air Force indicated that FY2009 was the last year for funding for the program, as the program was nearing completion. Guidance Replacement Program (GRP) The Guidance Replacement Program extended the service life of the Minuteman missiles’ guidance set, and improved the maintainability and reliability of guidance sets. It replaced aging parts with more modern and reliable technologies, while maintaining the accuracy of the missiles.46 Flight testing for the new system began in 1998, and, at the time, it exceeded its operational requirements. Production began in 2000, and the Air Force purchased 652 of the new guidance units. Press reports indicate that the system had some problems with accuracy during its testing program.47 The Air Force eventually identified and corrected the problems in 2002 and 2003. According to the Air Force, 425 Minuteman III missiles were upgraded with the new guidance packages as of early August 2007. The Air Force had been taking delivery of 5 to 7 new guidance units each month, for a total of 652 units. Boeing reported that it had delivered the final guidance set in early February 2009. The Air Force did not request any additional funding for this program in FY2010. However, it did request $1.2 million in FY2011 and $0.6 million in FY2012 to complete the program. It has not requested additional funding in subsequent years. Propulsion System Rocket Engine Program (PSRE) According to the Air Force, the Propulsion System Rocket Engine (PSRE) program was designed to rebuild and replace Minuteman postboost propulsion system components that were produced in the 1970s. The Air Force replaced, rather than repaired this system because original replacement parts, materials, and components were no longer available. This program was designed to reduce the life-cycle costs of the Minuteman missiles and maintain their reliability through 2020. The Air Force planned to purchase a total of 574 units for this program. Through FY2009, the Air Force had purchased 441 units, at a cost of $128 million. It requested an additional $26.2 million to purchase another 96 units in FY2010 and $21.5 million to purchase 37 units in FY2011. This completed the purchase of the units. As a result, the budget for FY2012 did not support the purchase of any additional units, but included $26.1 million for continuing work installing the units. The FY2013 budget request contained $10.8 million for the same purpose. The Air Force has not requested additional funding in subsequent years. Rapid Execution and Combat Targeting (REACT) Service Life Extension Program The REACT targeting system was first installed in Minuteman launch control centers in the mid-1990s. This technology allowed for a significant reduction in the amount of time it would take to retarget the missiles, automated routine functions to reduce the workload for the crews, and replaced obsolete equipment.48 In 2006, the Air Force began to deploy a modernized version of this system to extend its service life and to update the command and control capability of the launch control centers. This program will allow for more rapid retargeting of ICBMs, a capability 14, 2006. 46 LGM Minuteman III Modernization. Globalsecurity.org. 47 Donnelly, John M. Air Force Defends Spending Half A Billion on Iffy ICBMs. Defense Week. September 10, 2001. p. 1. 48 LGM Minuteman III Modernization. Globalsecurity.org. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 15 identified in the Nuclear Posture Review as essential to the future nuclear force. The Air Force completed this effort in late 2006. Safety Enhanced Reentry Vehicle (SERV) As was noted above, under the SERV program, the Air Force planned to deploy MK21/W-87 reentry vehicles removed from Peacekeeper ICBMs on the Minuteman missiles, replacing the older MK12/W62 and MK12A/W78 reentry vehicles. To do this, the Air Force modified the software, changed the mounting on the missile, and changed the support equipment. According to Air Force Space Command, the SERV program conducted three flight tests in 2005 and cancelled a fourth test because the first three were so successful.49 The Air Force installed 20 of the kits for the new reentry vehicles on the Minuteman missiles at F.E. Warren Air Force Base in 2006. The process began at Malmstrom in July 2007 and at Minot in July 2008. The Air Force purchased an additional 111 modification kits in FY2009, for a total of 570 kits. This was the last year that it planned to request funding for the program. It completed the installation process by 2012. This program is expected to ensure the reliability and effectiveness of the Minuteman III missiles throughout their planned deployments. The W-87 warheads entered the U.S. arsenal in 1986 and were refurbished in 2005. This process extended their service life past 2025.50 As noted below, the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) has initiated a life extension program for the W78 warhead, now known as the W87-1, to outfit the new Ground-based Strategic Deterrent (GBSD) that will replace the Minuteman III missile after 2030. Solid Rocket Motor Warm Line Program In the FY2009 Omnibus Appropriations Bill, Congress approved a new program known as the Solid Rocket Motor Warm Line Program. According to Air Force budget documents, this program was intended to “sustain and maintain the unique manufacturing and engineering infrastructure necessary to preserve the Minuteman III solid rocket motor production capability” by providing funding to maintain a low rate of production of motors each year.51 The program received $42.9 million in FY2010 and produced motors for four Minuteman ICBMs. DOD requested $44.2 million to produce motors for three additional ICBMs in FY2011. The budget request for FY2012 includes an additional $34 million to complete work on the motors purchased in prior years. The FY2013 budget did not contain any additional funding for this program area, although the Air Force continues to support the solid rocket motor production base with work funded through its Dem/Val program (described below). ICBM Fuze Modernization According to DOD budget documents, the ICBM fuze modernization program “is developing a form, fit and functionally equivalent replacement for the MK21 fuze” to “meet warfighter requirements and maintain current capability through 2030.” This program is needed because the current fuzes have long exceeded their original 10-year life span and the Strategic Command (STRATCOM) does not have enough fuzes available to meet its requirements. According to DOD, the Air force had initially expected to procure around 700 modernized fuzes for the Minuteman fleet. But the new fuzes will also be deployed on the missile that will eventually 49 Lt. Gen. Frank G. Klotz, Vice Commander, Air Force Space Command. Transcript of Speech to the National Defense University Breakfast. June 13, 2006. 50 Tom Collina, Fact Sheet: U.S. Nuclear Modernization, Arms Control Association, Washington, DC, January 5, 2009, http://www.armscontrol.org/USNuclearModernization. 51 http://www.saffm.hq.af.mil/shared/media/document/AFD-100128-067.pdf. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 16 replace the Minuteman system—the Ground Based Strategic Deterrent (GBSD), which is discussed in more detail below—eventually leading to a much larger program as the Air Force plans to acquire nearly 650 new missiles. According to the Air Force FY2020 budget request, “the Mk21 reentry vehicle and fuze will be deployed on the current Minuteman III (MM III) and future Ground Based Strategic Deterrent (GBSD).” In prior years, the budget documents had noted that the program would also “support of the modernization of a fuze used on submarine-launched ballistic missiles,” but the FY2020 budget request notes that NNSA is no longer pursuing the plan for a combined W78/88-1 Life Extension Program. The ICBM fuze modernization program has grown in recent years, from $57.9 million in FY2015 to $142 million in FY2016, $189.8 million in FY2017, $179 million in FY2018, and $172.9 million in FY2019. The Air Force requested, and Congress authorized, $161.2 million for FY2020 (P.L. 116-92). The Air Force budget documents for FY2020 show that the Air Force planned to fund the program at $133 million in FY2021, with the program then decreasing to $60 million in FY2022 and $2 million in FY2023 and FY2024. However, in October 2019, the Air Force indicated that the program would face delays due to technical issues with the systems capacitors.52 Consequently, in its budget request for FY2021, the Air Force has indicated that the program requires “a program rebaseline due to capacitor redesign issues and funding limitations in FY19 and FY20.” It has requested $167 million for FY2021 and notes that “the funding profile needs for FY22 and beyond will be addressed in future budget submissions.” ICBM Dem/Val Program The Air Force has also funded, through its RDT&E budget, a number of programs under the ICBM Dem/Val (demonstration and validation) title that are expected to allow it to mature technologies that might support both the existing Minuteman fleet and the future ICBM program (known as the Ground Based Strategic Deterrent). Congress appropriated $72.9 million for these programs in FY2014, $30.9 million in FY2015, $39.8 million in FY2016, and 108.7 million for FY2017. With the FY2017 budget request, the Air Force moved this program element into the program element for the ground-based strategic deterrent. Hence, although these projects are designed to support both the Minuteman force and the future force, they will likely begin to focus more specifically on the needs of the new missile. In its FY2018 budget request, the Air Force sought only $10.7 million for the Dem/Val program. This represents a significant reduction from the FY2017 level and from the FY2018 funding anticipated in the FY2017 budget documents. The Air Force notes, in its FY2018 budget documents, that the FY2018 funding “reflected a realignment of $61.868M to higher Air Force priorities.” When asked about this realignment, Air Force Vice Chief of Staff General Stephen Wilson noted that it was not a sign of waning support for the nuclear weapons modernization programs in the Air Force, but was specific to issues affecting only that program.53 The Air Force requested $41.9 million for this program area in the FY2019 budget; Congress provided $32.3 million. The Air Force requested $44 million for this program area in FY2020; Congress provided this amount in the FY2020 National Defense 52 This is the same capacitor that, as described below, is likely to cause delays in the W88-Alt and B61-12 warhead life extension programs. Sara Sirota, “NNSA technical issues cause rebaselining of $2 billion ICBM fuze modernization program,” Inside Defense, October 24, 2019. 53 Rachal Karas, “Air Force Moving Money From B61, ICBM Upgrades to Fund ‘Higher Priorities,’” Inside Defense, May 26, 2017. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 17 Authorization Act (P.L. 116-92). The Air Force has requested $33 million for this program area in its FY2021 budget. The projects funded through the Dem/Val program area include ICBM guidance applications, ICBM propulsion applications, reentry vehicle applications, and command and control applications. In the area of guidance applications, DOD is seeking to “identify, develop, analyze, and evaluate advanced strategic guidance technologies, such as a new solid-state guidance system, for the ICBM fleet.”54 This new system would increase the accuracy of the ICBM force and allow the missiles to destroy hardened targets with a single warhead. However, recent press reports question whether this program is meeting the needs outlined by the Air Force and whether it will produce guidance technologies that can provide the needed increases in ICBM accuracy.55 In the area of propulsion applications, DOD is, among other things, “exploring improvements and/or alternatives to current propulsion systems.” This program area is specifically seeking to support the solid rocket motor research and development industrial base, so that it will have the capacity to support the ICBM force when the Air Force begins the procurement of its new ground-based strategic deterrent. In the area of reentry vehicle applications, DOD is seeking to both support reentry systems beyond their original design life and develop and test advanced technologies to meet future requirements. The area of command and control applications “evaluates and develops assured, survivable, and secure communications and battlespace awareness.” It is focusing on both skills and technologies needed to meet current and future requirements. Ground-Based Strategic Deterrent (GBSD) In 2002, the Air Force began to explore its options for a new missile to replace the Minuteman III, with the intent to begin deploying a new missile in 2018. It reportedly produced a “mission needs statement” at that time, and then began an Analysis of Alternatives (AOA) in 2004.56 In June 2006, General Frank Klotz indicated that, after completing the AOA, Air Force Space Command had decided to recommend “an evolutionary approach to the replacement of the Minuteman III capability,”57 which would continue to modernize the components of the existing missiles rather than begin from scratch to develop and produce new missiles. He indicated that Space Command supported this approach because it would be less costly than designing a new system “from scratch.” With this plan in place, the Air Force began examining the investments that might be needed to sustain the Minuteman force through 2030. According to General Robert Kehler, then Commander-in-Chief of STRATCOM, the missile should be viable throughout that time.58 In 54 Elaine Grossman, “Key Targeting Tech for Future U.S. Nuclear Missile has Gone Unfunded,” Nextgov.com, August 19, 2014. http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/02/17/top-secret-u-s-nuke-war-plans-thwarted.html. 55 Elaine M. Grossman, “Top Secret U.S., Nuke War Plans Thwarted,” The Daily Beast, February 17, 2016. 56 Selinger, Mark. Minuteman Replacement Study Expected to Begin Soon. Aerospace Daily and Defense Report. June 25, 2004. 57 Lt. Gen. Frank G. Klotz, Vice Commander, Air Force Space Command. Transcript of Speech to the National Defense University Breakfast. June 13, 2006. 58 Jason Simpson, “Kehler: Air Force Investigating Minuteman III Follow-On System,” Inside the Air Force, October 8, 2009. See, also, Jason Simpson, “Testers See no Problems With Minuteman III Missiles Lasting to 2030,” Inside the Air Force, September 4, 2009. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 18 addition, according to DOD officials, flight tests and surveillance programs should provide the Air Force with “better estimates for component age-out and system end-of-life timelines.”59 At the same time, the Air Force has begun to consider what a follow-on system to the Minuteman III might look like for the timeframe after 2030. The Air Force began a capabilities-based assessment of its land-based deterrent in early 2011 and began a new Analysis of Alternatives (AOA) for the ICBM force in 2012 with completion expected in mid-2014.60 According to the Air Force, it requested $2.6 million to begin the study in the FY2012 budget. The FY2013 budget request included $11.7 million for a new project area known as Ground-based Strategic Deterrence (GBSD). According to the Air Force, this effort, which was previously funded under Long-Range Planning, included funding to begin the Analysis of Alternatives (AOA). The FY2014 budget request included $9.4 million to continue this study. In early January 2013, the Air Force Nuclear Weapons Center issued a “Broad Agency Announcement (BAA)” seeking white papers for concepts “that address modernization or replacement of the ground-based leg of the nuclear triad.” The papers produced as a part of this study served as an early evaluation of alternatives for the future of the ICBM force, and may have helped select those concepts that will be included in the formal Analysis of Alternatives. According to the BAA, the Air Force Nuclear Weapons Center created five possible paths for further analysis. These include one that would continue to use the current Minuteman III baseline until 2075 without seeking to close gaps in the missiles’ capabilities, one that would incorporate incremental changes into the current Minuteman III system to close gaps in capabilities, one that would design a new, fixed ICBM system to replace the Minuteman III, one that would design a new mobile ICBM system, and one that would design a new tunnel-based system. Some analysts expressed surprise at the possibility that the Air Force would consider deploying a new ICBM on mobile launchers or in tunnels. During the Cold War, the Air Force considered these types of deployment concepts as a way to increase the survivability of the ICBM force when faced with the possibility of an attack with hundreds, or thousands, of Soviet warheads. Even during the Cold War, these concepts proved to be very expensive and impractical, and they were dropped from consideration after the demise of the Soviet Union and in the face of deep reductions in the numbers of U.S. and Russian warheads. Some analysts saw the Air Force’s possible renewed interest in these concepts as a step backward; they argued that the United States should consider retiring its ICBM force, and should not consider new, expensive schemes to increase the missiles’ capabilities. Others, however, noted that the presence of these concepts in the study did not mean that the Air Force would move in this direction. They noted that the 2010 NPR mentioned the possibility of mobile basing for ICBMs as a way to increase warning and decision time, so it should not be a surprise to see requests for further study. However, the cost and complexity of mobile ICBM basing has, again, eliminated these concepts from further consideration. According to press reports, this AOA was completed in 2014 and briefed to industry officials in July 2014. The Air Force had reportedly decided to pursue a “hybrid” plan for the next generation ICBM. It would maintain the basic design of the missile, the current communications system, and the existing launch silos, but would replace the rocket motors, guidance sets, postboost vehicles, 59 See the prepared statement of Assistant Secretary of Defense Madelyn Creedon, U.S. Congress, House Armed Forces, Strategic Forces, Hearing on the Proposed Fiscal 2014 Defense Authorization as it Relates to Atomic Energy Defense Activities. 113th Cong., 1st sess., May 9. 2013. 60 Department of Defense, November 2010 Update to the National Defense Authorization Act of FY2010, New START Treaty Framework and Nuclear Force Structure Plans, Washington, DC, November 17, 2010, p. 11, http://www.lasg.org/CMRR/Sect1251_update_17Nov2010.pdf. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 19 and reentry systems. Reports indicated that, although this missile would be deployed in fixed silos, the design would allow the missiles to be deployed on mobile launchers sometime in the future.61 However, in recent documents, the Air Force has indicated that the GBSD program “will replace the entire flight system, retaining the silo basing mode while recapitalizing the ground facilities.” While this seemed to indicate that there would be a greater level of effort to modernize the silos and launch control facilities, it did not resolve questions about whether the Air Force would continue to retain the option of deploying the missiles on mobile launchers and how much such an option might cost. Nevertheless, there seemed to be some indications that the cost of such an option might be prohibitive, and that the priority is on designing a new missile that would be deployed in fixed silos, although mobile launch control facilities remain a possibility. The Air Force received $75 million for the GBSD program in FY2016 and an additional $113 million for FY2017. It requested $215.7 million for FY2018, a reduction from the $294 million for FY2018 expected in the FY2017 budget documents. The Air Force noted that this reduction of $78.2 million occurred to align the program with an Independent Cost Estimate conducted by DOD. Congress authorized $215.7 million for the GBSD in the National Defense Authorization Act for 2018 (P.L. 115-91). The Defense Authorization Act for 2017 (P.L. 114-328) also included a provision stating that none funds available in FY2017 or FY2018 could be “obligated or expended to retain the option for, or develop, a mobile variant of the ground-based strategic deterrent missile.” The NDAA for 2018 extended this prohibition through FY2019; the NDAA for FY2019 (P.L. 115-232) extended this prohibition through 2020. The Air Force requested $345 million for the GBSD program in FY2019. In the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (P.L. 115-232), Congress added $69.4 million, for a total authorization of $414.4 million for the GBSD program. The conference report (H.Rept. 115-874) did not provide a rationale for this increase, although the report from the Senate Armed Services Committee (S.Rept. 115-262) did note that the program was ahead of schedule and that the committee “strongly supports the GBSD program as an integral part of the nuclear modernization effort.” The conference report also required that the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment, in consultation with the Secretary of the Air Force, develop and implement “a plan to accelerate the development, procurement, and fielding” of the GBSD program. It noted that the plan should account for the “recapitalization of the full intercontinental ballistic missile weapon system for 400 deployed missiles and associated spares and 450 launch facilities.” The Air Force requested $570.3 million of the GBSD program in its budget for FY2020, consistent with the expected funding level identified in FY2019. Congress approved funding of $552.4 million in the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 116-92). The conference report also included a provision, in Section 1671, mandating that the Secretary of Defense submit a report to Congress that assesses “the risks and costs resulting from receiving only one bid” for the engineering and manufacturing development phase of the GBSD program. This provision responds to concerns about the potential for an increase in the cost of the program after Boeing withdrew and left Northrop Grumman as the only company competing for the GBSD contract.62 61 Elaine Grossman, “Key Targeting Tech for Future U.S. Nuclear Missile has Gone Unfunded,” Nextgov.com, August 19, 2014. 62 Valerie Insinna, “Boeing could be out of the Air Force’s competition for next-gen ICBMs for good,” Defense News, October, 21, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/smr/nuclear-arsenal/2019/10/22/boeing-could-be-out-of-the-air-forces-competition-for-next-gen-icbms-for-good/. See, also, Joe Gould, “House Armed Services chairman takes aim at Air Force’s handling of ICBM replacement program,” Defense News, October 24, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/congress/2019/10/24/hasc-chair-takes-aim-at-air-forces-handling-of-icbm-replacement-U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 20 The Air Force has requested $1.52 billion for the GBSD program in its FY2021 budget. The budget shows that the funding will continue to increase, growing to $2.5 billion in 2022 and $3 per year between 2023 and 2025. According to the Air Force, these increases are “required for FY21 and beyond” to execute the Engineering & Manufacturing Development phase of the program. According to DOD budget documents, the Air Force is seeking to deliver “an integrated flight system” beginning in FY2029, with booster production beginning in FY2026. In FY2017, the Air Force awarded two contracts—one to Northrop Grumman and one to Boeing—for the Technology Maturation and Risk Reduction (TMRR) phase of the program, which will run through FY2020. The goals of this phase are for the contractors to deliver the preliminary design of a “modular, integrated weapon system” and to “mature technologies related to the major activities and demonstrate performance of sub-system capabilities through prototyping, modeling, and simulation.” The Air Force has indicated that it could award an $85 billion contract to Northrup Grumman for the Engineering and Manufacturing Development phase sooner than the planned date of September 2020.63 According to press reports, the Air Force estimated, in 2015, that the program would cost a total of $62.3 billion, in then-year dollars, over 30 years. This included $48.5 billion for the acquisition of 642 missiles, $6.9 billion for command and control systems, and $6.9 billion to renovate the launch control centers.64 The 642 missiles would support testing and deployment of a force of 400 missiles. Recent reports indicate that the Pentagon’s Cost Analysis and Program Evaluation Office (CAPE) estimated that the program would cost $85 billion over that time, with $22.6 billion for research and development, $61.5 billion for procurement, and $718 million for related military construction.65 The Air Force has indicated that the $23 billion difference in estimates is due to the fact that CAPE used different assumptions and a different methodology in its analysis, in part, because the United States has not designed and produced long-range missiles in decades. Normally, DOD would require that the Air Force and CAPE agree on a cost estimate before the program could proceed, but it this was not be the case with the GBSD. Deborah Lee James, the Secretary of the Air Force at the end of the Obama Administration, indicated that it could take a year or more to refine cost estimates, based on the submissions received by defense industry as they bid on the program.66 Press reports indicate that, unless it is accelerated, the system would reach its initial operational capacity, with 9 missiles on alert, by 2029 and would complete the deployment with 400 missiles on alert in 2036.67 The Air Force, however, plans to install new command and control systems in all 450 existing launch silos by 2037. In addition, the missile will employ an “open architecture” so that technologies can be upgraded as needed, through the expected 60-year life of the missile. program/?utm_source=Sailthru&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=EBB%2010.25.19&utm_term=Editorial%20-%20Early%20Bird%20Brief. 63 Valerie Insinna, “Northrop could get $85 billion award to make next-gen ICBMs sooner than expected,” Defense News, April 16, 2020, https://www.defensenews.com/space/2020/04/16/northrop-could-be-getting-an-85b-award-to-produce-next-gen-icbms-sooner-than-expected/. 64 Kingston Reif, “Air Force Drafts Plan for Follow-on ICBM,” Arms Control Today, July/August 2015. 65 Anthony Carpaccio, “America’s New Nuclear Armed Missile Could Cost $85 Billion,” Bloomberg News, September 6, 2016. 66 Aaron Mehta, “Planned ICBM Replacement To Move Forward Without Consensus,” Defense News, September 19, 2016, http://www.defensenews.com/articles/james-new-icbm-cost-question-will-not-impact-next-budget. 67 Brian Bradley, “GBSD Scheduled to Reach IOC in FY'29,” Nuclear Security and Deterrence Monitor, August 7, 2015. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 21 According to officials at Boeing, this modular, open architecture will help keep down the costs of maintenance and upgrades.68 Moreover, by designing a completely new system, officials believe the Air Force can acquire a more modern, capable, and flexible system at a lower cost than needed to complete another life extension of the Minuteman III. The new system would be “flexible for a wide range of scenarios” and would have improved performance “against modern, precision-guided missile defenses.”69 W87-1 Warhead The Air Force plans to replace the W78 warhead currently carried by the Minuteman III missile with a new warhead when it deploys the new GBSD missile. The W87-1 warhead is the third and current iteration of this new warhead. The W78 warhead is the oldest warhead in the U.S. stockpile, dating from 1979. The Obama Administration outlined a plan to replace it with a new warhead, known as the IW1 (Interoperable Warhead-1), which could have been delivered by ICBMs (in place of the W78 warhead) and SLBMs (in place of the W88 warheads). The Obama Administration suspended work on this new warhead in FY2016 and did not request any funding for it in the FY2017 and FY2018 budget requests. In the FY2019 budget request for the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), the Trump Administration requested $53 million to resume research and development activities on the IW1. Congress enacted this amount, but requested a study on the rationale for and alternatives to the plan to use an interoperable warhead as a part of the W78 life extension program. During 2018, NNSA dropped the IW1 designator and, instead, pursued a life extension program for just the W78 ICBM warhead. It then designated this program as the W87-1, to reflect the fact that it has a similar primary design to the existing W87 warhead, a warhead also carried by the Minuteman III ICBM. According to a report provided to Congress in late 2018, [NNSA] “is no longer planning for an interoperable warhead program as previously conceived,” and no longer plans to “pursue a W78 life-extension program using the existing aeroshell.”70 Instead, the new warhead, like the existing W87 warhead, the warhead will use insensitive high explosives (IHE) that meet Air Force and NNSA safety and security requirements. NNSA expects that the new warhead will cost between $8.6 billion and $14.8 billion, before accounting for the new plutonium pit inside the warhead. According to the report provided to Congress, “NNSA is currently planning for the W87-1 program to include newly manufactured pits.”71 NNSA currently has only a limited capacity to produce new plutonium pits, with that capacity located at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico. In May 2018, NNSA announced that would pursue a new approach for plutonium pit production to meet the requirement of producing a minimum of 80 pits per year by 2030, as outlined in the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review. Instead of focusing solely on building capacity at Los Alamos National Laboratory, NNSA decided to “repurpose the Mixed Oxide (MOX) Fuel 68 Stew Magnuson, “Air Force on a Long Road to Replace Minuteman III,” National Defense, July 23, 2017. 69 Sydney Freedberg Jr., “New ICBM Cheaper Than Upgraded Minuteman: Boeing on GBSD,” Breaking Defense, August 2, 2017. 70 Department of Energy, National Nuclear Security Administration, W78 Replacement Program (W87-1): Cost Estimates and Use of Insensitive High Explosives, Washington, DC, December 8, 2018, p. 2, http://www.airforcemag.com/Features/Documents/W78%20Replacement%20Program%20Cost%20Estimates%20IHE.pdf. 71 Ibid. p. 5. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 22 Fabrication Facility at the Savannah River Site to produce at least 50 pits per year” and to continue work that would allow Los Alamos to produce “no fewer than 30 pits per year.”72 Critics have questioned whether NNSA will be able to meet this schedule, and even those who support the effort note that it will be a challenge.73 NNSA has apparently recognized the possibility that it will not have enough new pits available to support the GBSD deployment schedule with W87-1 warheads. In its budget documents, NNSA has indicated that it plans to complete the first production unit of the W87-1 in FY2030. However, the FY2021 budget documents also note that the W87-0 warhead, which is currently deployed on U.S. ICBMs, will also be “qualified and deployed onto the GBSD.” This would provide the Air Force with an alternative warhead if the W87-1 warhead is delayed. NNSA requested $112 million in FY2020 for the W87-1 warhead modification program. NNSA also requested $420 million in FY2020 to support design activities at Savannah River and begin the modifications needed to produce 50 pits per year at the repurposed facility by 2030. In addition, the Air Force requested $75.6 million for the MK21A Reentry Vehicle Program in FY2020. This program will “design, develop, produce, and deploy an integrated reentry vehicle capable of delivering the W87-1 warhead.” The House, in its version of the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Bill (H.R. 2500), reduced the request for the W87-1 warhead to $53 million and the request for to support design activities at Savannah River to $179 million. The Senate’s version of the bill supported the budget requests, and the Congress approved $112 million for the W87-1 modification program and $65.7 million for the MK21A Reentry Vehicle Program in the Conference Report on the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 116-92). Congress also appropriated $420 million to support design activities at Savannah River. NNSA has requested $541 million W87-1 warhead modification program. NNSA has indicated that this increase over the $112 million enacted for the W87-1 in FY2020 reflects a “ramp-up” of activities across all program areas. NNSA has also requested $441.9 million to support the design of the new pit facility and plutonium processing at Savannah River. The Air Force has requested $112.8 million for the MK21A Reentry Vehicle Program. Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missiles The U.S. fleet of ballistic missile submarines consists of 14 Trident (Ohio-class) submarines, each originally equipped to carry 24 Trident missiles. With 2 submarines in overhaul, the operational fleet of 12 submarines currently carries around 1,100 warheads. To comply with the launcher limits in New START, each of the submarines can now carry only 20 missiles. The four empty launch tubes have been removed from accountability under New START after being modified so that they can no longer carry or launch missiles. As a result, the 14 submarines count as a total of 280 deployed and nondeployed launchers, with 240 deployed launchers counting on the 12 operational submarines. 72U.S. Department of Energy, National Nuclear Security Administration, Plutonium Pit Production, Fact Sheet, Washington, DC, April 2019, https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2019/05/f62/2019-05-13-FACTSHEET-plutonium-pits.pdf. 73 Dan Leone, “NNSA Downplays Study that Says Agency Can't Make 50 Nuke Cores Per Year by 2030 in S.C.,” Nuclear Security and Deterrence Monitor, April 12, 2019. See, also, Colin Demarest, The Aiken Standard, August 28, 2019, https://www.aikenstandard.com/news/going-gangbusters-srns-chief-says-plutonium-work-harkens-back-to/article_a94e8d8a-c995-11e9-8741-2f606f64ed72.html. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 23 By the early 1990s, the United States had completed the deployment of 18 Trident ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs). Each of these submarines was equipped to carry 24 Trident missiles, and each missile could carry up to 8 warheads (either W-76 warheads or the larger W-88 warheads on the Trident II missile). The Navy initially deployed eight of these submarines at Bangor, WA, and all eight were equipped with the older Trident I missile. It then deployed 10 submarines, all equipped with the Trident II missile, at Kings Bay, GA. During the 1994 Nuclear Posture Review, the Clinton Administration decided that the United States would reduce the size of its Trident fleet to 14 submarines, and that 4 of the older submarines would be “backfit” to carry the Trident II missile. The Bush Administration’s 2001 Nuclear Posture Review endorsed the plan to backfit four of the Trident submarines so that all would carry Trident II missiles. It also indicated that, instead of retiring the remaining four submarines, the Navy would convert them to carry conventional weapons, and designated them “guided missile” submarines (SSGNs). The 2010 NPR also endorsed a force of 14 Trident submarines, although it noted that it might reduce that force to 12 submarines in the latter half of this decade. As was noted above, each submarine will deploy with only 20 missiles to meet the reductions in New START. As a result, the U.S. ballistic missile submarine (SSBN) force may continue to consist of 14 Trident submarines, with 2 in overhaul, through New START implementation. The SSGN Program The Navy converted four Trident submarines (the USS Ohio, USS Michigan, USS Florida, and USS Georgia) to carry conventional cruise missiles and other conventional weapons. Reports indicate that the conversion process took approximately $1 billion and two years for each of the four submarines. The SSGNs can each carry 154 Tomahawk cruise missiles, along with up to 100 special forces troops and their mini-submarines.74 The first two submarines scheduled for this conversion were removed from the nuclear fleet in early 2003. They were slated to receive their engineering overhaul, then to begin the conversion process in 2004.75 The first to complete the process, the USS Ohio returned to service as an SSGN in January 200676 and achieved operational status on November 1, 2007. According to the Navy, the Georgia was scheduled for deployment in March 2008, and the other submarines were scheduled to reach that status later in the year.77 According to Admiral Stephen Johnson, the Director of the Navy’s Strategic Submarine Program (SSP), all four of the submarines had returned to service by mid-2008, and two were forward-deployed on routine patrols. According to the Navy, these submarines are likely to remain in service through the mid-2020s. The Backfit Program As was noted above, both the 1994 and 2001 Nuclear Posture Reviews confirmed that the Navy would backfit four Trident submarines so that they could carry the newer Trident II (D-5) missile. 74 Connolly, Allison. For Four Subs, Its Good-bye Ballistic Missiles, Hello SEALs. Norfolk Virginia Pilot. December 18, 2004. 75 Ohio Class SSGN Tactical Trident. GlobalSecurity.org http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/systems/ship/ssgn-726.htm. 76 First Trident Submarine Converted. Associated Press. January 10, 2006. 77 U.S. Congress. Senate. Armed Services Committee, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces. Fiscal Year 2008 Strategic Forces Program Budget. Hearing. Prepared statement of Mr. Brian R. Green, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, Strategic Capabilities, p. 6. March 28, 2007. See also, Guided Missile Submarine Ohio Ready for Deployment. Inside the Navy, November 5, 2007. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 24 This process not only allowed the Navy to replace the aging C-4 missiles, it also equipped the fleet with a missile that has improved accuracy and a larger payload. With its greater range, it would allow the submarines to operate in a larger area and cover a greater range of targets. These characteristics were valued when the system was designed and the United States sought to enhance its ability to deter the Soviet Union. The Bush Administration believed that the range, payload, and flexibility of the Trident submarines and D-5 missiles remained relevant in an era when the United States may seek to deter or defeat a wider range of adversaries. The Obama Administration has emphasized that, by providing the United States with a secure second strike capability, these submarines enhance strategic stability. Four of the eight Trident submarines based in Bangor, WA (USS Alaska, USS Nevada, USS Henry M. Jackson, and USS Alabama) were a part of the backfit program. The Alaska and Nevada both began the process in 2001; the Alaska completed its backfit and rejoined the fleet in March 2002 and the Nevada did the same in August 2002. During the process, the submarines underwent a preplanned engineered refueling overhaul, which accomplishes a number of maintenance objectives, including refueling of the reactor, repairing and upgrading some equipment, replacing obsolete equipment, repairing or upgrading the ballistic missile systems, and other minor alterations.78 The submarines also are fit with the Trident II missiles and the operating systems that are unique to these missiles. According to the Navy, both of these efforts came in ahead of schedule and under budget. The Henry M. Jackson and Alabama were completed their engineering overhaul and backfit in FY2006 and reentered the fleet in 2007 and 2008. The last of the Trident I (C-4) missiles was removed from the fleet in October 2004, when the USS Alabama off-loaded its missiles and began the overhaul and backfit process. All the Trident submarines currently in the U.S. fleet now carry the Trident II missile.79 Basing Changes When the Navy first decided, in the mid-1990s, to maintain a Trident fleet with 14 submarines, it planned to “balance” the fleet by deploying 7 Trident submarines at each of the 2 Trident bases. The Navy would have transferred three submarines from Kings Bay to Bangor, after four of the submarines from Bangor were removed from the ballistic missile fleet, for a balance of seven submarines at each base. However, these plans changed after the Bush Administration’s Nuclear Posture Review. The Navy has transferred five submarines to Bangor, “balancing” the fleet by basing nine submarines at Bangor and five submarines at Kings Bay. Because two submarines would be in overhaul at any given time, this basing plan means that seven submarines would be operational at Bangor and five would be operational at Kings Bay. According to unclassified reports, the Navy began moving Trident submarines from Kings Bay to Bangor in 2002, and transferred the fifth submarine in September 2005.80 This change in basing pattern apparently reflected changes in the international security environment, with fewer targets within range of submarines operating in the Atlantic, and a greater number of targets within range of submarines operating in the Pacific. In particular, the shift allows the United States to improve 78 SSBN-726 Ohio-Class FBM Submarines, GlobalSecurity.org, http://www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/systems/ssbn-726-recent.htm. 79 Morris, Jefferson. Older Trident Missiles to be Phased out by Fall, Admiral Says. Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, June 17, 2005. 80 Robert S. Norris and Hans M. Kristensen. U.S. Nuclear Forces, 2006. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. January/February 2006. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 25 its coverage of targets in China and North Korea.81 Further, as the United States modifies its nuclear targeting objectives it could alter the patrol routes for the submarines operating in both oceans, so that a greater number of emerging targets would be within range of the submarines in a short amount of time. Warhead Loadings The Trident II (D-5) missiles can be equipped to carry up to eight warheads each. Under the terms of the original START Treaty, which was in force from 1994 to 2009, the United States could remove warheads from Trident missiles, and reduce the number listed in the database, a process known as downloading, to comply with the treaty’s limit of 6,000 warheads. The United States took advantage of this provision, reducing to six warheads per missile on the eight Trident submarines based at Bangor, WA.82 During the George W. Bush Administration, the Navy further reduced the number of warheads on the Trident submarines so that the United States could reduce its forces to the 2,200 deployed warheads permitted under the 2002 Moscow Treaty. The United States did not have to reach this limit until 2012, but it had done so by 2009. The United States has continued to reduce the total numbers of warheads carried on its Trident missiles to reach the New START Treaty limits. Unlike START, which attributed the same number of warheads to each missile of a given type, regardless of whether some of the missiles carried fewer warheads, the United States can deploy different numbers of warheads on different missiles, and count only the actual warheads deployed on the force. This will allow each missile to be tailored to meet the mission assigned to that missile.83 The United States does not need to indicate how many warheads are deployed on each missile at all times; it must simply report the total number of operationally deployed warheads on all of its strategic nuclear delivery vehicles. The United States and Russia can confirm that actual number of warheads on a specific missile, with random, short-notice inspections. Moreover, the United States will not have to alter the platforms in the missiles, so it could restore warheads to its Trident missiles if circumstances changed. Modernization Plans and Programs The Navy initially planned to keep Trident submarines in service for 30 years, but then extended that time period to 42 years. This extension reflects the judgment that ballistic missile submarines would have operated with less demanding missions than attack submarines, and could, therefore, be expected to have a much longer operating life than the expected 30-year life of attack submarines. Therefore, since 1998, the Navy has assumed that each Trident submarine would have an expected operating lifetime of at least 42 years, with two 20-year operating cycles separated by a 2-year refueling overhaul.84 With this schedule, the submarines will begin to retire from the fleet in 2027. The Navy has also pursued a number of programs to ensure that it has enough missiles to support this extended life for the submarines. 81 Ibid. 82 Even though four of these submarines are being converted to SSGNs, they still count under the START Treaty because they still have SLBM launch tubes. Each of those tubes count as six warheads. See U.S. Department of State. Bureau of Verification, Compliance, and Implementation. START Aggregate Number of Strategic Offensive Arms. April 1, 2006. 83 Hans M. Kristensen and Robert S. Norris, “United States Nuclear Forces, 2017,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, December 2016, p. 52. 84 SSBN Ohio-Class FBM Submarines. GlobalSecurity.org. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 26 Trident Missile Production and Life Extension The Navy purchased a total force of 533 D-5 missiles through 2012. It continued to produce rocket motors, at a rate of around one per month, and to procure alternation kits (known as SPALTs) needed to meet the extended service life of the submarine. Although the Navy plans to deploy its submarines with only 240 ballistic missiles under New START, it needs the greater number of missiles to support the fleet throughout the their life-cycle. In addition, around 50 of the Trident missiles are available for use by Great Britain in its Trident submarines. The remainder would support the missile’s test program throughout the life of the Trident system. The Navy is pursuing a life extension program for the D-5 missiles, known as the D5LE (D-5 Life Extension) so that they will remain capable and reliable throughout the 42-year life of the Trident submarines; they will also serve as the initial missile on the new Columbia class submarine. The funding for the Trident II missile supported the purchase of additional solid rocket motors other critical components required to support the missile throughout its service life. Reports indicate the Navy started loading the submarines with the new missile in 2017.85 In 2019, the Navy’s Strategic Systems Program office indicated that it would begin a second life extension program for the Trident II missile—known as the D5LE2—to replace old parts and ensure the missiles’ reliability through the life of the Columbia class submarine.86 Reports indicate that the Navy plans to spend $700 million over six years to conduct studies and analyses, with the design of the new missile beginning in FY2025.87 The Navy allocated $5.5 billion to the Trident II missile program in FY2008 and FY2009. This funding supported the purchase of an additional 36 Trident II missiles. The Navy spent $1.05 billion on Trident II modifications in FY2010 and requested $1.1 billion in FY2011. In FY2010, $294 million was allocated to the purchase of 24 new missiles, $154.4 million was allocated to missile support costs, and $597.7 million was allocated to the Trident II Life Extension program. In FY2011, the Navy requested $294.9 million for the purchase of 24 new missiles, $156.9 million to missile support costs, and $655.4 million to the Trident II Life Extension Program. The FY2012 budget included $1.3 billion for Trident II missile program. Within this total, $191 million was allocated to the purchase of 24 additional new missiles, $137.8 million was allocated to missile support costs, and $980 million was allocated to the Trident II Life Extension Program. This was the last year during which the Navy sought to purchase new Trident II missiles. The FY2013 budget requested $1.2 billion for the Trident II missile program. This total included $524 million for program production and support costs, and $700.5 million for the Trident II life extension program. The Navy requested $1.14 billion for this program area in FY2014. According to the Navy’s budget documents, this allowed it to continue to purchase components, such as the alteration kits for the guidance and missile electronics systems and solid rocket motors for these missiles. The Navy received $1.17 billion for FY2015 and $1.1 billion for FY2016 for Trident II modifications. The Navy requested, and Congress authorized, $1.1 billion for Trident II modifications in FY2017, $1.2 billion in FY2018, and $1.1 billion in FY2019. In its FY2020 budget request, the 85 Hans M. Kristensen and Robert S. Norris, “U.S. Nuclear Forces, 2018,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, March 2018, https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00963402.2018.1438219?needAccess=true. 86 Megan Eckstein, “Navy Beginning Tech Study to Extend Trident Nuclear Missile Into the 2080s,” USNI News, November 14, 2019, https://news.usni.org/2019/11/14/navy-beginning-tech-study-to-extend-trident-nuclear-missile-into-the-2080s. 87 Jason Sherman, “Navy reveals six-year, $700M plan to design second Trident SLBM life extension,” Inside Defense, March 6, 2020, https://insidedefense.com/daily-news/navy-reveals-six-year-700m-plan-design-second-trident-slbm-life-extension. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 27 Navy requested $1.17 billion for Trident II modifications, with the funding covered through the Overseas Contingency Operations (OCO) portion of the Pentagon budget. When asked about this anomaly, the Navy confirmed that it did not plan to employ Trident missiles in ongoing overseas operations, and that it was instructed to fund the program through OCO to meet the constraints of the Budget Control Act. Congress approved this funding in the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 116-92). The Navy plans to spend about $5 billion on Trident II modifications between FY2021 and FY2024. The Navy has requested $1.17 billion for Trident II modifications in FY2021. Within this total, the Navy has requested $111 million for the D5LE2 project. Although not noted in the budget document’s description, $32 million will support the development of the MK7 aeroshell, which will be deployed on the D5LE2 missile with the new W93 warhead (described below). W76 Warhead Life Extension The overwhelming majority of Trident missiles are deployed with the MK4/W76 warhead, which, according to unclassified estimates, has a yield of 100 kilotons.88 It is recently completed a life extension program (LEP) that was designed to enhance its capabilities. According to some reports, the Navy had initially planned to apply this program to around 25% of the W76 warheads, but then increased that plan to cover more than 60% of the stockpile. NNSA completed production of the W76-1 LEP in 2019. The LEP is intended to add 30 years to the warhead life “by refurbishing the nuclear explosive package, the arming, firing, and fusing system, the gas transfer system, and associated cables, elastomers, valves, pads, cushions, foam supports, telemetries, and other miscellaneous parts.” NNSA requested $224.1 million for the W76 LEP in FY2018 and $133.9 million in FY2019. It did not request any additional funding in FY2020 or FY2021 due to the “completion of remaining W76 warhead modifications and associated deliveries to the Navy. The FY2019 budget documents also introduced a new component to the W76 LEP. NNSA noted that “the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review (NPR) states that the United States will modify a small quantity of existing SLBM warheads to provide a low-yield option in the near-term.” The NPR views this capability as a response to the belief that Russia, using what is often referred to as the “escalate to de-escalate” doctrine, might misjudge U.S. willingness to respond to the limited first use of nuclear weapons during a conventional conflict in Europe. The NPR argues that, by deploying a low-yield SLBM warhead, the United States will “ensure that the Russian leadership does not miscalculate regarding the consequences of limited nuclear first use” and will “understand that nuclear first-use, however limited, will fail to achieve its objectives, fundamentally alter the nature of a conflict, and trigger incalculable and intolerable costs for Moscow.”89 NNSA designated the low-yield version of the W76 warhead as the W76-2. NNSA’s FY2019 budget request did not request any funding specifically allocated to this modification, but it did note that “as the Nuclear Weapons Council translates policy into military requirements, the Administration will work with Congress for appropriate authorizations and appropriations to develop options that support the modification.” The White House later included a request for $65 million for this modification in a budget amendment package submitted to Congress on April 13, 88 Robert S. Norris and Hans M. Kristensen. U.S. Nuclear Forces, 2015. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. March 2015, http://bos.sagepub.com/content/71/2/107.full.pdf+html. 89 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, p. 30, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 28 2018. This document stated that the amendment would “authorize the production of low-yield ballistic missiles to replace higher-yield weapons currently deployed, maintaining the overall number of deployed U.S. ballistic missile warheads.” It noted that a delay in the program past FY2019 “would require a restart of the W76 production line, increase costs, and delay delivery to the Department of Defense.”90 Congress approved the FY2019 funding request in the Energy and Water Appropriations Act, H.R. 5895, and noted, in the conference report (H.Rept. 115-929), that NNSA must “comply with the direction in the House report regarding the W76-2.” The House report (H.Rept. 115-697) mandated that NNSA provide Congress with “a report detailing the plan, rationale, costs, and implications of producing a low-yield variant of the W76 warhead.” The report is to include not only cost and schedule estimates, but also a “detailed discussion of the military requirements associated with the W76-2.” NNSA completed its work on the W76-2 warhead in FY2019, so it requested only $10 million for the program in FY2020 to support program documentation and close out activities. The Navy also requested $19.6 million to begin the integration of the warhead onto its D-5 missiles. The House, in its version of the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act [H.R. 2500] prohibited the use of FY2020 funds for that purpose. The Senate version of the bill included the funding, and Congress approved the requests for both $10 million for NNSA and $19.6 million for the Navy in the final version of the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 116-92). Press reports indicate that the Navy began to deploy the W76-2 warhead in late January 2020. John Rood, then the Undersecretary of Defense for Policy, confirmed the deployment in early February, noting that “the warhead will help the United States dissuade Russia from risking launching a limited nuclear conflict.”91 Several questions came up during the W76 life extension program. For example, some weapons experts questioned whether the warhead’s design is reliable enough to ensure that the warheads will explode at its intended yield.92 In addition, in June 2006, an inspector general’s report from the Department of Energy questioned the management practices at the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), which is responsible for the LEP, arguing that management problems had led to delays and created cost overruns in the program. This raised questions about whether NNSA would be able to meet the September 2007 delivery date for the warhead,93 and, when combined with other technical issues, delayed the delivery of the first W76 warhead until August 2008. The Navy accepted the first refurbished warhead into the stockpile in August 2009.94 W88 Alteration Program While most Trident II missiles carry W76 warheads, a portion of the fleet carries the W88 warhead. This warhead, the last to be added to the U.S. nuclear stockpile, entered the force in the late 1980s. According to DOE, this warhead is also in need of work to address concerns with its 90 Aaron Mehta, “Trump administration repurposes $65 million for new nuclear warhead design,” Defense News, April 17, 2018, https://www.defensenews.com/smr/nuclear-triad/2018/04/17/trump-administration-repurposes-65-million-for-new-nuclear-warhead-design/. 91 Robert Burns, “US adds ‘low yield’ nuclear weapon to its submarine arsenal,” Associated Press, February 4, 2020, https://apnews.com/b910d5f4f2076d558416ae021b511517. 92 Fleck, John. Flaws Seen in Sub-Launched Nuclear Warhead. Albuquerque Journal. July 8, 2004. 93 Costa, Keith J. IG: Project Weaknesses put W-76 Warhead Refurbishment Plan at Risk. InsideDefense.com, June 8, 2006. 94 “Navy Receives First Refurbished W-76 Warheads,” Global Security Newswire, November 6, 2009. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 29 safety and reliability. In particular, according to recent testimony, the W88 warhead is in the “development engineering phase for Alteration (ALT) 370 to replace the aging arming, fuzing, and firing components.” In August 2014, the Nuclear Weapons Council also decided to address potential problems with the warhead’s conventional high explosive during the ALT 370 program. This program received $169.5 million in FY2014, $165.4 million in FY2015, and $220.1 million in FY2016. In its FY2016 budget request, NNSA indicated that the additional funding for this program will come from offsets generated by reducing sustainment activities and the quantities of stored warheads for some other types of warheads. In essence, NNSA “identified areas where increased risk could be accepted to produce cost-savings within the current program—without additional funding—and without additional delays to future work.”95 NNSA received $281.1 million for the W88 Alteration in FY2017. It requested $332.3 million for FY2018, $304.3 million in FY2019, and $304.2 million in FY2020. Congress enacted these amounts. NNSA has requested $256.9 million for the W88 Alternation in FY2021. According to NNSA budget documents, this program was scheduled to produce its first production unit (FPU) in 2020. However, in May 2019, NNSA indicated that the delivery of the first production unit was likely to slip after it identified defects in the electrical capacitors used in the modified warheads. NNSA’s Kansas City National Security Campus, which acquires the nonnuclear parts of nuclear weapons, had determined that the capacitors might not remain reliable for 30-year life of the modified warheads. As a result, NNSA plans to replace the capacitors that cost about $5 per unit with $75 units built to a higher standard. This is likely to add about $120-$150 million to the cost of the W88-Alt LEP.96 W93 Warhead and MK7 Aeroshell In its FY2021 budget request, NNSA has requested $53 million to begin Phase 1 “concept assessment and refinement” activities for a new W93 warhead. NNSA and the Navy have indicated that the W93 sea-based warhead will eventually replace the W76 and W88 warheads on life-extended Trident II missiles. In the past, NNSA documents had referred to this warhead as the “next Navy warhead.” NNSA had not expected to request funding for it until FY2023. A DOD official noted that because the warhead does not yet exist, this is not a life extension program, but neither NNSA nor DOD has designated this as a “new” warhead.97 According to Admiral Richard, the Commander of USSTRATCOM, it is a new program of record.98 95 Ibid. 96 Dan Leone, “Balky Capacitors Could Delay Two NNSA Nuke Refurb Programs,” Nuclear Security and Deterrence Monitor, May 10, 2019, https://www.exchangemonitor.com/balky-capacitors-delay-two-nnsa-nuke-refurb-programs/. See, also, Aaron Mehta, “How a $5 part used to modernize nuclear warheads could cost $850 million to fix,” Defense News, September 25, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/smr/nuclear-arsenal/2019/09/25/nuclear-warhead-programs-need-850m-fix-heres-how-the-government-plans-to-cover-it/?utm_source=Sailthru&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=EBB%2009.26.19&utm_term=Editorial%20-%20Early%20Bird%20Brief. 97 Aaron Mehta, “Inside America’s newly revealed nuclear ballistic missile warhead of the future,” Defense News, February 24, 2020, https://www.defensenews.com/smr/nuclear-arsenal/2020/02/24/inside-americas-newly-revealed-nuclear-ballistic-missile-warhead-of-the-future/?utm_source=Sailthru&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=EBB%2002.25.20&utm_term=Editorial%20-%20Early%20Bird%20Brief. 98 Patrick Tucker and Marcus Weisgerber, “A New Nuclear Warhead? STRATCOM Chief Can’t Answer Yes or No,” Defense One, February 27, 2019, https://www.defenseone.com/politics/2020/02/new-nuclear-warhead-stratcom-chief-cant-answer-yes-or-no/163395/?utm_source=Sailthru&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=EBB%2002.28.20&utm_term=Editorial%20-%20Early%20Bird%20Brief. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 30 The Navy plans to design a new reentry body, known as the MK7 aeroshell, that will house the new warhead when it is deployed on Trident II missiles. It has requested $32 million for this effort in FY2021, and expects to request a total of $480 million over the next five years.99 The Columbia Class Submarine The Navy is currently completing design work and beginning procurement of a new class of ballistic missile submarines, known as the Columbia Class. This was originally known as the SSBN(X) program and the Ohio Replacement Program (ORP). These submarines will replace the Ohio-class Trident submarines as they reach the end of their service lives.100 The Trident submarines will begin to retire in 2027, and the Navy initially indicated that it would need the new submarines to begin to enter the fleet by 2029, before the number of Trident submarines falls below 12.101 To do this, the Navy would have had to begin construction of its new submarine by 2019 so that it could begin to enter the fleet in 2029.102 However, in the FY2013 budget request, the Navy delayed the procurement of the new class of submarines by two years. As a result, the first new submarine will enter the fleet in 2031 and the number of SSBNs in the fleet is expected to decline to 10 for most of the 2030s. Costs and Funding The SSBN(X) program received $497.4 million in research and development funding in the Navy’s FY2010 budget. The Navy requested an additional $672.3 million in research and development funding for the program in its FY2011 budget proposal. The FY2012 budget included $1.07 billion to develop the SSBN(X). It expected to request $927.8 million in FY2013, with the funding of $29.4 billion between 2011 and 2020. However, with the delay of two years in the procurement of the first SSBN(X), the Navy budgeted only $565 million for the program in FY2013. It then budgeted $1.1 billion for FY2014 and $1.2 billion in FY2015. It received an additional $1.39 billion in FY2016, with $971.4 million allocated to submarine development and $419.3 million allocated to power systems. The Navy requested an additional $1.9 billion for the Ohio-replacement (ORP) in FY2017. Within this total, $700.1 million was allocated to submarine development and $390.3 million was allocated to nuclear power systems. The Navy also requested $773.1 million for advanced procurement; this funding will support detailed design work in preparation for the beginning of construction. Both the House and the Senate authorized the requested levels of funding in their versions of the 2017 Defense Authorization Bill. The House, however, moved the $773.1 million for advanced procurement from the Navy’s shipbuilding budget into the congressionally created National Sea-based Deterrent Fund (NSDF), which is described below. Congress approved the full funding requests in the FY2017 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 114-328), but did not transfer funding for advanced procurement to the NSDF. The Navy requested $1.9 billion for the Columbia class submarine in FY2018, with $776.2 million for submarine development, $265.5 million for advanced nuclear power systems, and $842.9 million for advanced 99 Jon Harper, “Political Battle Brewing Over New Nuclear Program,” National Defense, March 17, 2020, https://www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/articles/2020/3/17/political-battle-brewing-over-new-nuclear-program. 100 For details on this program, see CRS Report R41129, Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 101 Christopher J. Castelli, “Navy Confronts $80 Billion Cost of New Ballistic Missile Submarines,” Inside Defense, November 3, 2009. 102 RADM Stephen Johnson, Director, Navy Strategic Programs Office. Speech at the NDU/NDIA Seminar Series, June 23, 2009. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 31 procurement. Congress approved this request in the National Defense Authorization Act for FY2018 (H.Rept. 115-404). The Navy requested $3.8 billion for the Columbia Class submarine in its FY2019 budget. Within this total, $514.8 million was allocated to submarine development, $256.1 million to advanced nuclear power systems, and $3 billion to advanced procurement. Congress authorized $526.8 million for submarine development and $3.2 billion for advanced procurement in the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (P.L. 115-232). According to the Navy’s budget documents, the FY2019 request is “predominantly driven by procurement of the two-year long lead time” of equipment needed to begin construction of the first submarine. This equipment includes launcher and fire control subsystem components, nuclear propulsion plant equipment, and hull mechanical and electrical systems. According to the Navy, “these funds are required in October of 2018 to ensure the Columbia Program meets program schedules and the components will meet contractor in yard need dates to support on time construction start and delivery of the lead ship.” Moreover, within the $3 billion requested for advanced procurement, the largest single amount ($1.7 billion) is allocated to the “nuclear propulsion plant equipment”—the nuclear reactor that will power the submarine. The Navy requested $2.23 billion for the Columbia Class submarine in its FY2020 budget. Within this total, $551 million is allocated to research and development, $1.7 billion is allocated to advanced procurement. In addition, the NNSA budget contains $75 million for the development of the nuclear reactor for the submarine. The House, in its version of the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Bill, increased funding for advanced procurement to $1.824 billion, and the Senate increased funding for research and development to $548.1 million. Congress approved $1.822 billion for advanced procurement and $548.1 million for research and development in the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 116-92). The Navy has requested $4.4 billion for the Columbia Class submarine in its FY2021 budget. While this is a 90% increase over the request for FY2020, it is consistent with the funding level that planned for FY2021, with significant funding now going towards procurement. Within the $4.4 billion total, the Navy has allocated $397 million to research and development, $1.1 billion to advanced procurement, and $2.9 billion to procurement. In addition, the NNSA budget contains $64.7 million for the development of the nuclear reactor for the submarine. The Navy had planned to begin the detailed design for the submarine and to begin advanced procurement of critical components in FY2015, with the seven-year construction period for the first submarine beginning in FY2019. This timeline changed, in part to reduce near-term costs, but also to reduce risks in the program. With advanced procurement beginning in FY2017, the Navy plans to begin building the first hull in 2021. At the same time, it will continue to support the joint U.S./U.K. development of a common missile compartment, which both nations will use in their new SSBNs. The Navy initially estimated that each submarine in this program could cost $6 billion to $7 billion in FY2010 dollars. It has worked to redesign the submarine and reduce the costs, with the plan to hold each submarine to around $4.9 billion, in FY2010 dollars. Officials in the Navy and analysts outside government have expressed concerns about the cost of this program, and about the effect that these costs may have on the rest of the Navy’s shipbuilding plans. A study by the Congressional Budget Office indicated that the SSBN(X) program could cost a total of $97-$102 billion, in 2010 dollars, with $10-$15 billion for research and development and $87 billion for the procurement of 12 submarines.103 A March 2015 GAO report assessing estimated the total 103 Congressional Budget Office, An Analysis of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2014 Shipbuilding Plan, Washington, DC, U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 32 acquisition cost of the SSBN(X) program at about $95.8 billion, in constant FY2015 dollars, including about $11.8 billion in research and development costs and about $84.0 billion in procurement costs.104 More recently, the Navy has estimated that the first submarine would cost $13.2 billion in 2018 dollars and that subsequent ships would have an average cost of $6.6 billion, for a total acquisition cost of $85 billion for 12 submarines. With research and development costs of $13 billion, the total acquisition cost would be $98 billion.105 There has been widespread agreement, in the Navy, at the Pentagon, and among defense analysts, that the costs associated with the Columbia class submarine could undermine the rest of the Navy’s shipbuilding budget. At one point, Navy officials estimated that, if the Navy funded this program through its current, planned shipbuilding budget, it would have to forgo the acquisition of up to 32 other naval vessels. According to former Navy Secretary Ray Mabus, unless Congress provides extra funding, “the production of 12 new ships to replace the Ohio-class submarines could ‘gut’ the Navy’s shipbuilding budget for more than a decade.”106 In testimony before Congress in February 2015, Navy officials noted that “the Navy continues to need significant increases in our topline beyond the FYDP [Future Years Defense Plan] … in order to afford the OR [Ohio replacement] SSBN procurement costs. Absent a significant increase … OR SSBN construction will seriously impair construction of virtually all other ships in the battle force: attack submarines, destroyers, and amphibious warfare ships.”107 In response to this growing fiscal pressure, Admiral Richard Breckenridge suggested, in testimony offered in 2013, that Congress set up an annual $4 billion supplemental fund outside the Navy’s budget to help support this program.108 Several Members of Congress have supported this proposal.109 Congress included language in the FY2015 National Defense Authorization Act establishing a National Sea-based Deterrence Fund (P.L. 113-291, §1022). According to the legislation, money placed in the fund will be available for the design, construction, purchase, alteration, and conversion of “national sea-based deterrence vessels,” which is a reference to ballistic missile submarines. The legislation also states that the Secretary of Defense has the authority to transfer up to $3.5 billion into the fund from unobligated funds in the DOD budget. Congress did not, however, appropriate increased funding for this effort, and the Secretary of Defense had not identified or transferred any money into this fund. In the FY2016 NDAA, (H.R. October 2013, p. 24, http://www.cbo.gov/publication/44655. 104 Government Accountability Office, Defense Acquisitions[:] Assessments of Selected Weapons Programs, GAO-15-342SP, March 2015, p. 148. 105 CBO has calculated the acquisition cost, excluding research and development, at $93 billion. See Congressional Budget Office, An Analysis of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2019 Shipbuilding Plan, Washington, DC, October 2018, p. 18, https://www.cbo.gov/system/files?file=2018-10/54564-FY19Shipbuilding.pdf. 106 Yasmin Tadjdeh, “Mabus: Ohio-Class Submarine Replacement Could ‘Gut’ Navy Shipbuilding Budget,” National Defense, September 15, 2014, http://www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/blog/Lists/Posts/Post.aspx?List=7c996cd7%2Dcbb4%2D4018%2Dbaf8%2D8825eada7aa2&ID=1601. 107 Statement of the Honorable Sean J. Stackley, Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and Acquisition) and Vice Admiral Joseph P. Mulloy, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Integration of Capabilities and Resources and Lieutenant General Kenneth J. Glueck Jr., Deputy Commandant, Combat Development and Integration & Commanding General, Marine Corps Combat Development Command, Before the Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces of the House Armed Services Committee on Department of the Navy Seapower and Projection Forces Capabilities, February 25, 2015, p. 8. 108 Lee Hudson, “Navy Asks Congress To Set Up Supplemental Fund for SSBN(X),” InsideDefense.com, September 12, 2013. 109 “Some U.S. Lawmakers Eye Funding new Submarines Outside Normal Process,” Global Security Newswire, March 12, 2014. See, also, Lee Hudson, “House Committee Looks to Create Separate Fund for Ohio Replacement,” InsideDefense.com, May 2, 2014. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 33 1735, §1051), Congress expanded the authority to transfer funding and included provisions allowing the Secretary of the Navy to enter into “economic order quantity contracts” that might achieve economic efficiencies based on production economies for major components or subsystems. Some analysts estimate that this provision could reduce the procurement costs for the submarine, saving, perhaps, several hundred million dollars per submarine.110 Most experts agree that, without increased appropriations, this fund may protect the Navy’s shipbuilding budget from the costs of the Columbia class submarine, but that it would not really solve the DOD’s problem, because the money for the fund would have to come from other portions of the Pentagon budget.111 Nevertheless, the Navy continues to support the Columbia class submarine as its highest priority, with Admiral John Richardson, the Chief of Naval Operations, noting that the ballistic missile submarine force is “foundational to our survival.”112 Force Posture The Navy is designing the new Columbia Class submarines with only 16 ballistic missile launch tubes. The existing Trident submarines have 24 launch tubes, and each has been reduced to 20 missiles as the United States complies with the New START Treaty. Congress questioned the Navy on this plan during hearings in April 2011, with some Members asking whether the United States would be able to deploy enough warheads if it reduced the numbers of missiles on each submarine. Admiral Terry Benedict, then the Director of the Navy’s Strategic Systems Program Office, testified that the Navy’s ability to “upload” warheads onto Trident missiles convinced him, along with other Navy and STRATCOM officials, that they could be comfortable with this configuration.113 However, Congress remained unconvinced. In the FY2012 Defense Authorization Act, it called for a new study that should consider the possibility of deploying 10 or 12 submarines with 16 launch tubes on each and 8 or 10 submarines with 20 launch tubes on each. Moreover, the study was to review not only the cost of each option, but also the ability of each option to meet the Navy’s at-sea requirements for the SSBN force and the ability of each option to meet the nation’s nuclear employment and planning guidance.114 A report published in late 2011 indicated that the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) suggested that the Navy reduce the number of SSBNs in the fleet to 10, but increase the number of launch tubes on each submarine to 20.115 According to the OMB analysis, this could save the Navy $7 billion over the life of the fleet, by reducing acquisition costs and operating costs. It would not, however, undermine the submarines’ mission because, with 20 missiles per submarine, the Navy would still be able to cover the full range of targets assigned to the Trident fleet. Analysts outside government have offered similar suggestions, noting that the Navy could save $27 billion over 10 years and $120 billion over the life of the fleet if the Navy built 8, rather than 12 submarines.116 Moreover, according to this analysis, the Navy would be able to deploy the 110 Eric Laws, An Analysis of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2016 Shipbuilding Plan, Congressional Budget Office, Washington, DC, October 2015, pp. 18-19, https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/114th-congress-2015-2016/reports/50926-Shipbuilding_OneCol-2.pdf. 111 Kingston Reif, “Hill Denies Money for Submarine Fund,” Arms Control Today, January 2016. http://www.armscontrol.org/ACT/2016_0102/News/Hill-Denies-Money-for-Submarine-Fund. 112 Robert Burns, “New Navy Leader: Nukes ‘Foundational to Our Survival,’” Associated Press, January 7, 2016. 113 Emelie Rutherford, “Navy Defends Plan for Just 16 Missile Tubes on Next Boomer,” Defense Daily, April 7, 2011. 114 Elaine M. Grossman, “U.S. Defense Conference Bill Seeks New Submarine Cost Assessment,” Global Security Newswire, December 16, 2011. 115 Colin Clark, “OMB Pushes More Tubes, Fewer Boats for Ohio Replacement Subs,” AOL Defense, November 4, 2011, http://defense.aol.com/2011/11/04/omb-pushes-more-tubes-fewer-boats-for-ohio-replacement-subs/. 116 Tom Collina and Kelsey Davenport, “U.S. Must Rethink New Subs, Bombers,” Defense News, October 24, 2011. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 34 necessary number of warheads on these submarines, even if it did not increase the number of launch tubes, by deploying more warheads on each of the Trident missiles on the submarine. Generally, the number of launch tubes on the submarines should not affect the number of warheads carried by each submarine or the ability of the fleet to hold a range of potential targets at risk. Trident missiles can be equipped with eight warheads each, but, in their current configuration, the missiles likely carry, on average, only three or four warheads each, as the force was reduced to the levels in New START. If the new submarines carry only 16 missiles, rather than the 20 planned under New START, then they could deploy with 5-6 warheads per missile. In essence, the Navy would put the same number of warheads on each submarine, but would just spread them over a smaller number of missiles. The Navy has noted that, as the United States reduces its forces to New START levels, the lower number of missiles per submarine will allow the United States to retain a larger number of submarines, without exceeding the treaty’s limit of 700 operational delivery vehicles. This allows the Navy to maintain a fleet of 12 submarines, and to operate those submarines with continuous deployments from 2 bases. The Navy has argued that, if it reduces the numbers of submarines in the fleet, and alters its deployment patterns, it will not be able to meet its requirements, as these cover more than just the total number of warheads on the fleet or total number of warheads at sea at any time. Critics outside the government, however, question this approach, both because a fleet of 12 submarines will cost more to procure and operate than a fleet of only 8 submarines and because this fleet presumes that the United States must retain its current pattern of operations for the SSBN fleet for the next 50-60 years. With 12 submarines in the fleet, the Navy can maintain 4-5 on station at any time, patrolling in areas where they would need to be to launch their missiles promptly after a presidential order. But critics question whether this pattern, and the “continuous at-sea” deterrent of 4-5 submarines, will be necessary in the decades ahead. They note that the United States will be able to maintain a secure second strike deterrent on the submarines, even if they cannot launch as many warheads promptly as they can launch today. Others however, continue to support the current operational patterns, and to argue for a fleet of 12 submarines into the future. Congress, in the FY2013 Defense Authorization Bill (P.L. 112-239, §130) stated that “the continuous at-sea deterrence provided by a robust and modern fleet of nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines is critical to maintaining nuclear deterrence and assurance and therefore is a central pillar of the national security of the United States.” The legislation went on to indicate that “a minimum of 12 replacement ballistic missile submarines are necessary to provide continuous at-sea deterrence over the lifetime of such submarines.... ” Bombers B-1 Bomber The Air Force began to deploy the B-1 bomber in the mid-1980s and eventually deployed a fleet of 96 aircraft. After several crashes, the Air Force was left with 92 bombers in 2001. It sought to retire 30 of the aircraft, leaving a force of 62 bombers, but that plan met resistance from Congress. The B-1 served exclusively as a nuclear delivery vehicle through 1991, carrying short-range attack missiles and gravity bombs. Because these bombers were not equipped to carry nuclear-armed air-launched cruise missiles, each counted as a single delivery vehicle and a single warhead under START. In 1993, the Air Force began to convert the B-1 bombers to carry conventional weapons. This process was completed in 1997 and the B-1 bomber is no longer equipped to carry nuclear weapons. In 2011, the United States displayed the bomber to the U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 35 Russians, under the terms of the New START Treaty, to demonstrate that it was no longer equipped to deliver nuclear weapons and to confirm that it would not count under the limits in New START. The bomber has contributed to U.S. conventional operations in Afghanistan and Iraq and contributed to reassurance missions in Asia. B-2 Bomber The Air Force has 20 B-2 bombers, which are based at Whiteman AFB in Missouri.117 The B-2 bomber can carry both B61 and B83 nuclear bombs, but is not equipped to carry cruise missiles. It can also carry conventional weapons and has participated in U.S. military campaigns from Bosnia to Iraq. It is designed as a “low observable” aircraft and was intended to improve the U.S. ability to penetrate Soviet air defenses. It continues to serve as a penetrating bomber, both when flying conventional missions and when supporting the nuclear deterrent mission. The Air Force has indicated that it needs significant maintenance and modernization funding to support the mission.118 Weapons According to unclassified estimates, the United States has around 322 B61 and B83 bombs for use by strategic bombers, and an additional 230 B61 bombs for use by fighter aircraft.119 The B61 contains a number of different versions. The B61-7 serves as a strategic bomb and is carried by B-2 bombers. The B61-3, 4, and 10 are considered nonstrategic bombs, with lower yields, and would be delivered by fighter aircraft like the F-16 and F-35. The B61-11, a modification developed in the 1990s, has a hardened, modified case so that it can penetrate some hardened targets, although probably not those encased in steel and concrete. The B61-Mod 7, along with the Mod-3 and Mod-4, and Mod-10 versions, are a part of an ongoing life extension program (LEP) that will produce a new B61-mod 12 bomb.120 During the Obama Administration, NNSA announced that it planned to retire the B83, the largest bomb remaining in the U.S. arsenal, around 2025, after the completion of the B61 LEP. The Trump Administration, in the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review, has altered that plan, announcing in the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review that it will sustain “the B83-1 past its currently planned retirement date until a suitable replacement is identified.”121 The Obama Administration strongly supported the life extension program for the B-61 bomb in the 2010 Nuclear Posture Review. The report indicated that “the Administration will fully fund the full scope LEP study and follow-on activities for the B61 bomb ... to ensure first production begins in FY2017.” The NPR noted that the life extension program for the B61 bomb, which would include enhancing safety, security, and use control, would also support U.S. extended deterrence goals by allowing the United States to retain the capability to forward-deploy U.S. 117 A B-2 bomber crashed on take-off from Anderson Air Force Base on Guam in late February 2008, reducing the number of deployed bombers from 21 to 20. 118 For details on the ongoing programs supporting this bomber and the B-52 bomber, see CRS Report R43049, U.S. Air Force Bomber Sustainment and Modernization: Background and Issues for Congress, by Jeremiah Gertler. 119 Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “U.S. Nuclear Forces, 2019,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, April 2019, https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00963402.2019.1606503?needAccess=true. 120 For a description of ongoing work in the B61 LEP program, see Kevin Robinson-Avila, “Overhauling the nation’s nuclear arsenal: Sandia National Labs achieves B61 milestone,” Albuquerque Journal, May 18, 2014. 121 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, p. 61, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 36 nuclear weapons on B-2 bombers and tactical fighter-bombers.122 The Trump Administration also voiced strong support for the program in the FY2018 Nuclear Posture Review. The timeline for the program has slipped, and NNSA now expects the first unit to be available in 2022, rather than 2020. The delayed occurred after NNSA identified defects in the capacitors used in six major electrical components. NNSA’s Kansas City National Security Campus, which acquires the nonnuclear parts of nuclear weapons, determined that the capacitors might not remain reliable for the 30-year life of the modified warheads. As a result, NNSA plans to replace the capacitors that cost about $5 per unit with $75 units built to a higher standard. This is likely to add about $600 million to $700 million to the cost of the B61-12 LEP.123 Some in Congress challenged the plans for this program, asking whether a less costly and complicated program might be sufficient. The Obama Administration claimed, however, that if it pursued a less complex life extension program now, it would need to initiate a second program a few years later to complete the remainder of the work. Moreover, the Obama Administration had noted that, after it completed the B61 life extension, DOE would be able to retire the much larger B83 bomb and reduce the number of B61 bombs in the U.S. stockpile. The Trump Administration continues to support the B61 life extension program, but has raised concerns about whether it will be able to replace the B83 in the U.S. stockpile. It noted that “the B83-1 and B61-11 can hold at risk a variety of protected targets,” and, therefore, “both will be retained in the stockpile, at least until there is sufficient confidence in the B61-12 gravity bomb that will become available in 2020.”124 There also is no indication, in the 2018 NPR, that the B61 LEP will allow NNSA to reduce the number of nondeployed warheads in the U.S. stockpile. The Air Force is also designing a new tail kit for the B61 bomb. This tail kit would replace the parachute that the bomb currently uses to slow to its targets, and would improve the accuracy of the weapon. Some analysts claimed that this tail kit would provide the bomb with new capabilities, and would undermine the Obama Administration’s pledge that it would not develop new military capabilities as it conducted the warhead life extension programs.125 Others, however, disputed this conclusion. They noted that the new B61-12 will combine an increase in accuracy with a reduction in yield, allowing it to accomplish the same mission as the current unguided, but higher yield, weapon. As a result, the Air Force has argued that the tail kit will allow the modified B61 bombs to meet operational requirements for the bomber fleet and provide “nuclear assurance to U.S. allies in Europe.” The Air Force and the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) conducted the first development flight test of the B61-12 LEP in July 2015126 and the first qualification flight test in 122 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, April 6, 2010, p. 27, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/features/defenseReviews/NPR/2010_Nuclear_Posture_Review_Report.pdf. 123 Dan Leone, “Balky Capacitors Could Delay Two NNSA Nuke Refurb Programs,” Nuclear Security and Deterrence Monitor, May 10, 2019, https://www.exchangemonitor.com/balky-capacitors-delay-two-nnsa-nuke-refurb-programs/. See, also, Aaron Mehta, “How a $5 part used to modernize nuclear warheads could cost $850 million to fix,” Defense News, September 25, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/smr/nuclear-arsenal/2019/09/25/nuclear-warhead-programs-need-850m-fix-heres-how-the-government-plans-to-cover-it/?utm_source=Sailthru&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=EBB%2009.26.19&utm_term=Editorial%20-%20Early%20Bird%20Brief. 124 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, p. 42, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. 125 William J. Broad and David Sanger, “As U.S. Modernizes Nuclear Weapons, “Smaller” Leaves Some Unease,” New York Times, January 11, 2016. See, also, Kyle Mizokami, “Why the Pentagon’s New Nukes Are Under Fire,” Popular Mechanics, January 12, 2016. 126 Marina Malenic, “U.S. Completes first B-61 LEP Flight Test,” Janes Defense Weekly, July 8, 2015. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 37 2017. It conducted two additional qualification flight tests in 2018.127 The tests integrated the new tail kit with bomb hardware developed by Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. According to NNSA, these qualification flight tests evaluate “both the weapon’s nonnuclear bomb functions as well as the aircraft’s capability to deliver the weapons.” They demonstrate “effective end-to-end system performance in a realistic ballistic flight environment.”128 These tests are likely to continue through 2020. Congress appropriated $788.6 million for the B61 LEP in FY2018, $794 million in FY2019, and $792.6 million in FY2020. NNSA has requested $815.7 million for FY2021. The Air Force is supporting the funding for the tailkit program. Congress appropriated $148.2 million in FY2015, $212.1 million in FY2016, $137.9 million for FY2017. The Air Force requested an additional $91.2 million in FY2018, which was a significant reduction from the $151 million the Air Force expected to request for FY2018 when it submitted its FY2017 budget. The FY2018 budget documents note that reduction was not the result of any expected changes in the program and that funds may be used to address higher Air Force priorities. The Air Force also requested $88 million in advanced procurement funding to support the acquisition of 30 tailkit assemblies. The Air Force requested $92 million for the research and development on the B61 tailkit in FY2019, along with $162 million in procurement funds to support the acquisition of 250 tailkit assemblies. The Air Force requested $27.6 million for research and development on the B61 tail kit in FY2020, along with $80.8 million in procurement funds to support the acquisition of 533 tail kit assemblies. The Air Force has requested $35.6 million for the tail kit assembly program in FY2021. This funding is designed to support the expected integration of the B61-12 into the force in the early 2020s. However, in May 2019, NNSA indicated that the delivery of the first production unit of the B61-12 was likely to slip after it identified defects in the electrical capacitors used in the modified warheads. NNSA’s Kansas City National Security Campus, which acquires the nonnuclear parts of nuclear weapons, had determined that the capacitors might not remain reliable for 30-year life of the modified warheads. As a result, NNSA plans to replace the capacitors that cost about $5 per unit with $75 units built to a higher standard. This is likely to add about $600-700 million to the cost of the W88-Alt LEP.129 NNSA does not plan to request additional funding to make up this difference, but will, instead, shift funding from other warhead life extension and sustainment programs. 127 National Nuclear Security Administration. NNSA, Air Force complete successful end-to-end B61-12 Life Extension Program flight tests at Tonopah Test Range, June 29, 2018. https://www.energy.gov/nnsa/articles/nnsa-air-force-complete-successful-end-end-b61-12-life-extension-program-flight-tests. 128 National Nuclear Security Administration, “NNSA, Air Force complete first B61-12 Life Extension Program qualification flight test at Tonopah Test Range,” press release, April 13, 2017, https://nnsa.energy.gov/mediaroom/pressreleases/nnsa-air-force-complete-first-b61-12-life-extension-program-qualification. 129 Dan Leone, “Balky Capacitors Could Delay Two NNSA Nuke Refurb Programs,” Nuclear Security and Deterrence Monitor, May 10, 2019, https://www.exchangemonitor.com/balky-capacitors-delay-two-nnsa-nuke-refurb-programs/. See, also, Aaron Mehta, “How a $5 part used to modernize nuclear warheads could cost $850 million to fix,” Defense News, September 25, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/smr/nuclear-arsenal/2019/09/25/nuclear-warhead-programs-need-850m-fix-heres-how-the-government-plans-to-cover-it/?utm_source=Sailthru&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=EBB%2009.26.19&utm_term=Editorial%20-%20Early%20Bird%20Brief. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 38 B-52 Bomber The Air Force maintains 76 B-52H aircraft at two bases, Barksdale, LA, and Minot, ND. Forty-six of these bombers are capable of delivering nuclear weapons, and 40 are deployed on a day-to-day basis.130 The B-52 bomber, which first entered service in 1961, can be equipped to carry nuclear or conventional air-launched cruise missiles. The B-52 bombers can also deliver a wide range of conventional arms, and are currently receiving numerous upgrades to their communications and electronics systems. The Air Force has proposed cutting the B-52 fleet on many occasions in the past 25 years. The 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review called for a reduction in the B-52 fleet from 94 to 56 aircraft. The budget request for FY2007 indicated that the Air Force planned to retire 18 bombers in FY2007 and 20 in FY2008. At the same time, the QDR called for continuing improvements to the B-1, B-2, and B-52 bombers’ conventional capabilities using the funds that were saved by the retirement of the 38 aircraft. At hearings before the Senate Armed Services Committee, General James E. Cartwright, then the Commander of STRATCOM, noted that “the next generation weapons that we’re fielding, these air-launched cruise missiles, the joint direct attack munitions, et cetera, are much more efficient than they were in the past.”131 General Cartwright also indicated that, in spite of the reduced size of the fleet, the Air Force would continue to deploy B-52 bombers at two bases. During the FY2007 budget cycle, Congress rejected the Pentagon’s proposals for at least part of the B-52 fleet. The House prohibited the Air Force from retiring any of the B-52 aircraft, and mandated that it maintain at least 44 “combat coded” aircraft until the Air Force began to replace the B-52 with a new bomber of equal or greater capability.132 The Senate agreed to permit the Air Force to retire 18 B-52 aircraft, but stated that it expected no further reduction in the size of the force, noting that a further reductions might “prevent our ability to strike the required conventional target set during times of war.”133 The conference committee (H.R. 5122, §131) combined these two provisions, allowing the retirement of no more than 18 aircraft after the submission of a report, and mandating that the Air Force retain at least 44 “combat coded” aircraft. In testimony before the Armed Services Committee in 2007, the Air Force indicated that it still planned to reduce the B-52 fleet to 56 aircraft, with 32 combat coded aircraft included in the fleet. But, in recognition of the congressional mandate, it was seeking a way to maintain 44 combat coded aircraft, the minimum set by Congress, within the smaller fleet of 56 aircraft. It also stated that it planned to store the 20 aircraft it wanted to retire in FY2008 on ramps at Barksdale Air Force Base; the aircraft would be kept in serviceable condition, but would not receive any capabilities upgrades.134 Congress once again rejected this proposal. In the FY2008 Defense Authorization Bill (H.R. 1585, §137), Congress mandated that the Air Force maintain a fleet of 130 Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “United States Nuclear Forces, 2020,” https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00963402.2019.1701286. 131 U.S. Senate, Committee on Armed Services, Hearing on Global Strike Plans and Programs. Testimony of James E. Cartwright, Commander U.S. Strategic Command. March 29, 2006. 132 U.S. Congress. House. Committee on Armed Services. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2007. H.Rept. 109-452. May 5, 2006. p. 103. 133 U.S. Congress Senate. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2007. S.Rept. 109-254. May 9, 2006. p. 94. 134 U.S. Congress. Senate. Armed Services Committee, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces. Hearing on the Fiscal Year 2008 Strategic Forces Program Budget. Statement of Major General Roger Burg. March 28, 2007. p. 8. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 39 74 B-52 bombers. The conference committee indicated that the members agreed that a fleet of fewer than 76 aircraft would be insufficient to meet long-range strike requirements. The growing interest in long-range strike capabilities, and the continuing addition of precision conventional weapons to these aircraft, demonstrates that the Pentagon and STRATCOM view the U.S. bomber fleet as essential to U.S. conventional weapons capabilities. Further, the need for long-range strike capabilities, rather than an interest in maintaining the nuclear role for bombers,135 appeared to be driving decisions about the size and structure of the bomber fleet. There are some indications that, during the discussions on the 2006 QDR, some in the Pentagon argued that the all the B-52 bombers should be removed from the nuclear mission. Moreover, in November 2008, Secretary of the Air Force Michael Donley noted that the role that the bombers play in nuclear deterrence could be reduced in the future, if the United States and Russia negotiate further reductions in their nuclear arsenals. This focus began to shift, however, in 2008. Studies have noted that a lack of attention paid in the Air Force and, more broadly, in DOD, to the bombers’ nuclear mission seems to be one of the factors that led to the episode in August 2007, when a B-52 bomber flew from Minot to Barksdale with six cruise missiles that carried live nuclear warheads.136 As is discussed in more detail below, the Air Force is pursuing a number of organizational and procedural changes to increase its focus on the nuclear mission and “reinvigorate” its nuclear enterprise. It has “stood-up” a B-52 bomber squadron that will focus specifically on the nuclear mission.137 This unit added 10 bombers to the 12 already deployed at Minot. While all the B-52 bomber crews and aircraft will retain their nuclear roles, this added squadron will participate in a greater number of nuclear exercises and training missions. The aircraft in the squadron will rotate from other missions, but will remain designated as the nuclear squadron for full year. The Air Force hopes this construct will improve not only the operational proficiency of the crews, but also their morale and their confidence in the value of the nuclear mission. With this change, Secretary of Defense Gates stated, in April 2009, that the Air Force planned to retain 76 B-52 bombers. The 2010 Nuclear Posture Review determined that the Air Force would retain nuclear-capable bombers, but it would also convert some B-52s to a conventional-only role. In the report on the New START force structure issued in April 2014, the Obama Administration indicated that the United States would retain 42 deployed and 4 nondeployed nuclear capable B-52 bombers. The remainder of the B-52 bombers would be converted to carry only conventional weapons. In September 2015, the Air Force announced that it had begun to convert a portion of the B-52H bomber force from nuclear to conventional-only capability, thus removing 30 operational bombers from accountability under New START.138 The database released after the March 2017 New START data exchange shows that the Air Force now has converted 41 bombers conventional-only capability, which removes them from accountability under New START. 135 Carlo Munoz, “Donley: Role of Nuclear Bomber Fleet Could Be Curtailed,” Inside the Air Force, November 14, 2008. 136 For a detailed review of this incident see, Warrick, Joby and Walter Pincus. The Saga of a Bent Spear. Washington Post, September 23, 2007. 137 Marcus Weisgerber, “USAF To Activate Rotational Nuclear Bomber Squadron Next Month,” Inside Defense, September 26, 2008. 138 Department of Defense, Air Force Global Strike Command, AFGSC Completes First New START Bomber Conversion, September 17, 2015. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 40 Long-Range Standoff (LRSO) Weapons At the end of the Cold War, the B-52 bomber was equipped to carry both the Air-Launched cruise missile (ALCM) and Advanced Cruise Missile (ACM). The ACM reportedly had a modified design with a lower radar cross-section, making it more “stealthy” than the ALCM. According to Air Force figures, in 2006, the United States had 1,142 ALCMs and 394 ACMs.139 Although these weapons represented a majority of the weapons that U.S. bombers could carry on nuclear missions, the Department of Defense decided to retire many of these missiles. In his statement to the Senate Armed Services Committee’s Subcommittee on Strategic Forces, Major General Roger Burg indicated that this study had concluded, and the Secretary of Defense had directed, that the Air Force retire all the Advanced Cruise Missiles, although some could be converted to carry conventional warheads, and reduce the ALCM fleet to 528 cruise missiles. The excess ALCMs would also be eliminated, with the remaining missiles consolidated at Minot Air Force Base. With all the ALCMs consolidated at Minot Air Force Base, the bombers at Barksdale may no longer be included in the nuclear mission. The Air Force plans to sustain the ALCM in the fleet through 2030. It is then planning to replace the ALCM with a new advanced long range standoff (LRSO) cruise missile. It completed an analysis of alternatives (AOA) for this system to “define the platform requirements, provide cost-sensitive comparisons, validate threats, and establish measures of effectiveness, and assess candidate systems for eventual procurement and production” of the new missile.140 The DOD budget request for FY2014 contained $5 million for the Air Force to begin systems engineering support for the program. The budget also indicated that the technology development phase would begin in FY2014, and that the funding requests could reach a total of $1 billion through FY2014. In the FY2015 budget request, DOD indicated that the plans for the LRSO missile had slipped by three years. This change was the result of fiscal constraints and the need to fund higher priorities elsewhere in the nuclear force. As a result, although the Air Force requested only $4.9 million for this program in FY2015, it indicated that it would spend $221 million over the next five years. Congress expressed concerns with this plan in the FY2015 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 113-291, §143), noting that the existing ALCMs were, on average, over 30 years old and that the capabilities provided by the cruise missile were “critical to maintaining a credible and effective air-delivery leg of the nuclear triad.” The legislation requested a report on the status of the current cruise missile and the development of the new LRSO missile. In its FY2016 budget request, the Air Force added funding for the LRSO to accelerate the program by two years, seeking to begin deployments in the mid-2020s. According to testimony, the Air Force had placed a higher priority on this program because the existing ALCM had been through several life extension programs and was beginning to show reliability problems. According to Frank Kendall, the Under Secretary of Defense for AT&L, this was making the ALCM more difficult to maintain.141 Where the Air Force requested only $3.4 million for this program in FY2015, it requested $36.6 million in FY2016. DOD expected this funding to increase rapidly, to a total of nearly $1.8 billion between FY2016 and FY2020. 139 The Air Force also has 289 ALCMs that have been converted to carry conventional warheads (CALCMs). See Michael Sirak. DOD Studies Future Role of Nuclear-Armed Cruise Missiles. Defense Daily, March 30, 2006. 140 Department of Defense, November 2010 Update to the National Defense Authorization Act of FY2010, New START Treaty Framework and Nuclear Force Structure Plans, Washington, DC, November 17, 2010, p. 12. http://www.lasg.org/CMRR/Sect1251_update_17Nov2010.pdf. 141 U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Armed Services, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces, President Obama’s Fiscal 2016 Budget Request for the U.S. Nuclear Weapons Policy, Programs and Strategy, Hearing, 114th Cong., 1st sess., March 4, 2014. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 41 Congress appropriated only $16.4 million for the LRSO in FY2016, reducing the request by $20.5 million due to delays in the award of the contract that reduced the budget requirements for the program. The Air Force requested $95.6 million for the LRSO in FY2017; Congress approved this amount FY2017 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 114-328). When it submitted its FY2017 budget, the Air Force indicated that it would request $419.8 million in FY2018 and a total of $2.1 billion between FY2018 and FY2021. The FY2018 budget request, however, included $451.2 million for the LRSO and indicated that the Air Force planned to request over $2.6 billion between FY2018 and FY2022. Congress approved the FY2018 request in the National Defense Authorization Act for FY2018 (P.L. 115-91). The Air Force requested $615 million for the LRSO in FY2019. The FY2019 budget documents indicate that the funding increase from FY2018 to FY2019 occurred due to a “ramp up” in Technology Maturation and Risk Reduction phase (TMRR), during which the contractors will “continue to design, develop, integrate and test the LRSO system” to meet “validated requirements prior to the engineering & manufacturing phase.” The Air Force requested $712.5 million for the LRSO in its FY2020 budget; Congress enacted this amount in the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 116-92). The Air Force has requested $474.4 million for the LRSO in its FY2021 budget. This is consistent with the level of funding for FY2021 expected in the FY2020 budget. In 2017, the Air Force awarded contracts to both Raytheon and Lockheed Martin to execute the LRSO Technology Maturation and Risk Reduction (TMRR) phase of the LRSO program. The TMRR phase was due to run for 4½ years, with the selection of a single contractor due to occur in FY2022, at the start of the engineering and manufacturing development phase. Nevertheless, in April 2020 the Air Force announced that LRSO development would continue with Raytheon Company as a sole-source contractor.142 In a statement, the Air Force indicated that it had decided to focus on Raytheon’s design because the competitive TMRR phase “enabled us to select a high-confidence design at this point in the acquisition process.”143 The Air Force indicated that it had not really down-selected to a single contractor, but that Lockheed Martin would still be involved in maturing some of the technologies and might still have a role in future upgrades of the system.144 NNSA is conducting a life-extension program on the W80 warhead, which will be carried by the LRSO. Its plans for the W80-4 warhead had also slipped in the FY2015 budget, with the Nuclear Weapons Council delaying the first production unit from 2024 until the 2025-2027 timeframe. Congress, in the FY2015 National Defense Authorization Act, mandated that NNSA deliver the first production unit of this new warhead by 2025 (P.L. 113-291, §3119). In its FY2016 budget request, NNSA indicated that it had allocated the resources necessary to meet this requirement, and to align the warhead life extension program with the plan to field the first LRSO missile in FY2026. Congress appropriated $195 million for the W80-4 life extension program in FY2016 142 Valerie Insinna, “The Air Force made a surprise decision to sole-source the Long Range Standoff Weapon. Here’s who will move forward,” Defense News, April 17, 2020, https://www.defensenews.com/smr/nuclear-arsenal/2020/04/20/the-air-force-made-a-surprise-decision-to-sole-source-the-long-range-standoff-weapon-heres-who-will-move-forward/. 143 Leah Bryant, Air Force selects single contractor for long-range standoff nuclear weapon, Air Force Nuclear Weapons Center, Kirtland Air Force Base, NM, April 17, 2020, https://www.afnwc.af.mil/News/Article/2155284/air-force-selects-single-contractor-for-long-range-standoff-nuclear-weapon/. 144 John A. Tirpak, “Lockheed May Still Play a Role in Upgrading Raytheon LRSO, Once it’s Operational,” Air Force Magazine, April 21, 2020, https://www.airforcemag.com/lockheed-may-still-play-a-role-in-upgrading-raytheon-lrso-once-its-operational/. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 42 and $220 million in FY2017. NNSA requested $399 million for FY2018 and $666.4 million in FY2019. NNSA requested 898.6 million for the W80-4 in FY2020, an increase of 37% over the $654.8 million enacted in FY2019. Congress approved this request in the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 116-92). NNSA has requested $1 billion for the W80-4 warhead in FY2021. According to its budget documents, NNSA has begun to “ramp up engineering activities for development and design on the W80-4,” and the significant increases in the budget request for FY2020 and FY2021 reflect an increase in the scope of work on the program. According to press reports, the Air Force plans to buy a total of 1,000-1,100 new cruise missiles through the LRSO program, at a cost of around $10.8 billion, with the first missile slated for completion in 2026.145 This total would support the testing program and deployment plans over the life of the missile. The LRSO program has attracted attention and significant debate among analysts outside government and several Members of Congress. Some have questioned whether the Air Force needed to accelerate the LRSO program and whether the United States needs and can afford to develop and produce a new cruise missile in the coming decade. They questioned whether the capabilities provided by the LRSO may be redundant, as the Air Force is also developing a new penetrating bomber and proceeding with the life extension program for the B61 bomb. Moreover, they noted that the Air Force also has conventional cruise missiles that could destroy critical targets from beyond the reach of an adversary’s air defenses.146 During testimony before both the House and Senate Armed Services Committees in 2015, Admiral Haney, the Commander of Strategic Command (STRATCOM), noted that the LRSO is “important from a deterrence and warfighting requirement” because it will provide Air Force bombers with a “standoff capability” now and into the future. He noted that this standoff capability will remain important because as more countries develop advanced air defenses, those defenses will provide them with “anti-access/access denial” capabilities. Admiral Haney and others have responded by noting that the capabilities are not redundant, but are complementary, because they provide the President with more flexibility and more options in the event of a crisis. In a letter to Senator Sanders in February 2016, Brian McKeon, the Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense, elaborated on this point, noting that Cruise missiles provide capabilities that complement rather than duplicate that of a stealth bomber. Standoff capability improves the survivability of our bomber fleet, extends its effective range, and multiplies the type and number of penetrating targets each bomber presents to the adversary. This complicates the air defense problem facing any country seeking to negate this portion of our deterrent. Lieutenant General (retired) David Deptula made a similar point in a recent interview. He noted that “LRSO will act as a force multiplier augmenting the long-range bomber force and appreciably complicating an adversary’s ability to defend its airspace.” He indicated that the weapons could “significantly increase the reach and target coverage” of U.S. bombers and “amplify” the challenge to enemy air defenses “posed by a combined force of stealth bombers 145 Kingston Reif, “Air Force Wants 1,000 New Cruise Missiles,” Arms Control Today, May 2015. 146 Council for a Liveable World. The Center for Arms Control and Non-Proliferation, Is a New Cruise Missile Necessary?, Fact Sheet, Washington, DC, February 2, 2016, http://armscontrolcenter.org/is-a-new-nuclear-cruise-missile-necessary/. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 43 and LRSO.” This would make “countermeasures both more costly and problematical for the adversary and thus enhances deterrence.”147 B-21 Bomber As the preceding discussion noted, the United States currently deploys two types of heavy bombers—the B-2 and B-52—that can deliver both nuclear and conventional weapons. A third bomber, the B-1, was initially equipped to deliver nuclear weapons but is now exclusively dedicated to conventional missions. The Air Force has employed all three aircraft in conventional conflicts over the past two decades, and all have received upgrades to sustain their capabilities, but all three are aging and, according to many in the Air Force, may not be sufficient to meet emerging challenges. As a result, the Air Force has also begun develop a new strategic bomber, now known as the B-21 Raider. When it began this effort more than a decade ago, it hoped to introduce the new bomber into the fleet around 2018. At the time, it was seeking a bomber with not only stealth capabilities and long range, but also one with “persistence,” one that could “stay airborne and on call for very long periods.”148 However, the start of the study on a new bomber, known as an Analysis of Alternatives (AOA), was delayed by a dispute over whether the study should stand alone or be merged with another AOA on prompt global strike (PGS) capabilities, such as hypersonic technologies and missiles.149 General James Cartwright, the former head of STRATCOM, reportedly supported a plan to merge the two efforts, so that the considerations of capabilities for a new bomber would be measured alongside other systems, both to balance the force and avoid redundancy across the force.150 On the other hand, the former Air Force Chief of Staff, General T. Michael Moseley, reportedly preferred to keep the two studies separate. He argued that a bomber with long-range strike capabilities must have “persistent, survivable, and penetrating capabilities” while a platform with PGS capabilities could be a “standoff weapon that is very, very fast.”151 This position reportedly prevailed, with the Air Force deciding, in May 2006, to keep the two studies separate.152 This dispute revealed wide-ranging differences, within the Air Force and Pentagon, about the goals for and capabilities that should be sought in a new bomber program.153 The dispute focused, however, on conventional capabilities; it seemed to be almost a foregone conclusion that nuclear capabilities, or the need for a bomber leg of the nuclear triad, would not drive the discussion or analysis. This position is still evident, with the Air Force seeking a new bomber to meet 147 Lt. Gen. Dave Deptula, “Stealthy New Nuclear Cruise Missile Aims to Deter the Enemy,” The Cipher Brief, August 8, 2017, https://www.thecipherbrief.com/article/north-america/stealthy-new-nuclear-cruise-missile-aims-deter-enemy?utm_source=Join+the+Community+Subscribers&utm_campaign=a20baac8c6-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2017_08_08&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_02cbee778d-a20baac8c6-122497273. 148 Christie, Rebecca. Air Force To Step Up New Bomber Search in Next Budget. Wall Street Journal. June 29, 2006. 149 For details on these types of systems, see CRS Report R41464, Conventional Prompt Global Strike and Long-Range Ballistic Missiles: Background and Issues, by Amy F. Woolf. 150 Grossman, Elaine M. Cartwright Wants to See Strike Studies Await “Discovery” Process. InsideDefense.com, April 6, 2006. 151 Bennet, John T. Internal Squabbles Holding Up Bomber Study, USAF Official Says. InsideDefense.com, April 21, 2006. 152 Matishak, Martin. Long-Range, Prompt Global Strike Studies Will Remain Separate. InsideDefense.com, June 16, 2006. 153 For more details on the proposed bomber, see CRS Report RL34406, Air Force Next-Generation Bomber: Background and Issues for Congress, by Jeremiah Gertler. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 44 conventional challenges, and considering delaying the introduction of nuclear capabilities to save money. But disagreements over the capabilities needed, even for the conventional mission, served to delay the new bomber program by several years. In May 2007, the Air Force indicated that it had decided that the next generation bomber would be manned and subsonic, although it would incorporate some stealth characteristics.154 It decided that it would not pursue supersonic capabilities, or an unmanned option, to contain costs and maintain the capabilities of the future aircraft. However, on April 6, 2009, in a briefing describing the FY2010 defense budget, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates delayed the program and indicated that the Air Force would not proceed until it had “a better understanding of the need, the requirement and the technology.”155 He suspended the program until DOD completed the QDR and 2010 Nuclear Posture Review. The 2010 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) indicated that the Air Force was “reviewing options for fielding survivable, long-range surveillance and strike aircraft as part of a comprehensive, phased plan to modernize the bomber force.”156 The report also noted that Secretary of Defense Gates ordered a follow-on study to the QDR to determine “what combination of joint persistent surveillance, electronic warfare, and precision-attack capabilities, including both penetrating platforms and stand-off weapons, will best support U.S. power projection operations over the next two to three decades.” Secretary Gates indicated that he expected the Air Force to field the next generation bomber in the late 2020s.157 In a report submitted to the Senate in late 2010, the Obama Administration emphasized that the United States would maintain the bomber leg of the strategic triad and that DOD was committed to modernizing the bomber force. The report noted that the long-range strike study was assessing “the appropriate type of bomber and the timelines for development, production, and deployment.”158 Secretary Gates confirmed this approach in January 2011, when he announced the Air Force would develop a new bomber “using proven technologies,” and that this bomber would be nuclear-capable.159 Air Force officials have indicated that they hope to field between 80 and 100 of the new bombers, now known as the B-21, with the first to enter service around 2025. It also indicated that it planned to hold the procurement cost for each bomber to $550 million, with the total cost of the program to reach $36-$56 billion. However, it acknowledged, in 2014, that this cost did not include research and development funding,160 which, according to some estimates, could amount to between $20 billion and $45 billion if the program follows the trends set by previous bomber 154 Sirak, Michael. Air Force Identifies Manned, Subsonic Bomber as Most Promising 2018 Option. Defense Today. May 2, 2007. 155 Department of Defense, Briefing by Defense Secretary Robert Gates and Marine Corps Gen. James Cartwright, Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Washington, DC, April 6, 2009, http://insidedefense.com/secure/data_extra/html3/dplus2009_0893_3.htm. 156 Department of Defense, Quadrennial Defense Review Report, Washington, DC, February 2010, p. 33, http://archive.defense.gov/qdr/QDR%20as%20of%2029JAN10%201600.pdf. 157 Andrea Shalal-Esa, “Gates Sees New U.S. Bomber Fielded in 2020s,” Reuters, February 2, 2010. 158 Department of Defense, November 2010 Update to the National Defense Authorization Act of FY2010, New START Treaty Framework and Nuclear Force Structure Plans, Washington, DC, November 17, 2010, p. 11, http://www.lasg.org/CMRR/Sect1251_update_17Nov2010.pdf. 159 Marcus Weisgerber, “Air Force To Develop New Long-Range, Optionally Manned Bomber,” Inside the Air Force, January 6, 2011. 160 Aaron Mehta, “USAF General: “Of Course” Bomber Will Be More Than $550M per Copy,” Defense News, March 5, 2014. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 45 programs.161 The per-unit cost would also rise if the Air Force were to buy fewer than the planned 80-100 bombers. As a result, many analysts agree that the final cost of the bomber could reach $60-$80 billion. Congress appropriated $259 million for R&D on this aircraft in FY2013, $359.4 million in FY2014, and $913.7 million in FY2015. These requests were sufficient to keep the bomber program on track but led to Air Force spending levels that exceeded the levels set by the 2011 Budget Control Act. According to one analysis at the time, the Air Force would likely need to reduce its other acquisition programs to find the “budget headroom” for this program.162 The Air Force requested $1.3 billion for FY2016, but Congress appropriated only $736 million. According to Air Force budget documents, this reduction reflected schedule delays in the program and the awarding of the contract. The Air Force announced on October 27, 2015, that it had awarded the initial contract, which includes the production of 21 bombers, to Northrup Grumman. Analysts believe this contract is worth more than $20 billion, but that the total cost of the program could reach $80 billion for 100 aircraft.163 This total includes development costs and the expected cost of $511 million (in 2010 dollars) for each of the 100 bombers. This represents a small reduction from the target cost of $550 million per bomber. The lower expected cost of the bombers was reflected in the Air Force budget request for FY2017, when the Air Force requested $1.4 billion for the B-21 instead of the $2.2 billion that it had expected for FY2017 as noted in the FY2016 budget documents. Congress further reduced this amount, authorizing $1.05 billion in the FY2017 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 114-328). The FY2017 Air Force budget also noted that the Air Force planned to request $12.1 billion between FY2017 and FY2021, as opposed to the $15.6 billion expected over five years in the FY2016 budget request. The Air Force indicated that these reductions reflected revised cost estimates following the award of the B-21 contract in late 2015.164 The Air Force requested $2 billion for the B-21 bomber in its FY2018 budget, $2.3 billion in FY2019, and 3 billion in FY2020. Congress approved most of the requested funding during these years, although the FY2019 Defense Appropriations bill funded the program at $2.28 billion. The Air Force has requested $2.8 billion for the B-21 in its FY2021 budget.165 Sustaining the Nuclear Weapons Enterprise In late August 2007, a B-52 bomber based in Minot, ND, took off on a flight to Barksdale Air Force Base in Louisiana. The bomber carried 12 air-launched cruise missiles that were slated for retirement at Barksdale. As a result of a series of errors and missteps in the process of removing the missiles from storage and loading them on the bombers, six of the missiles carried live nuclear warheads, instead of the dummy warheads that were installed on missiles heading for retirement. This episode was the first of many that have led to questions about the capabilities management of the U.S. nuclear weapons enterprise. It led to a series of studies and reviews by 161 Jon B. Wolfsthal, Jeffrey Lewis, and Marc Quint, The Trillion Dollar Nuclear Triad, James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies, Monterey, CA, January 2014, pp. 18-19. http://www.nonproliferation.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/140107_trillion_dollar_nuclear_triad.pdf. 162 Colin Clark, “LRS-B, Next Boomer May Force Weapons Cuts,” Breaking Defense, September 4, 2014. 163 Doug Cameron, “Northrop Grumman Wins Long-Range Bomber Deal,” Wall Street Journal, October 27, 2015. 164 Kingston Reif, “Budget Would Raise Nuclear Spending,” Arms Control Today, March 2016. 165 For details on the B-21 bomber, see CRS Report R44463, Air Force B-21 Raider Long-Range Strike Bomber, by Jeremiah Gertler. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 46 the Air Force that identified the source of the episode and identified a number of steps the Air Force should take to improve its handling of nuclear weapons.166 These studies were followed, in 2014, by additional studies and a number of changes designed to raise morale and the quality of life for servicemembers in the nuclear enterprise. In early June 2008, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates requested the resignations of the Secretary of the Air Force, Michael Wynne, and the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, General Michael Mosely, from their positions, at least in part, due to concerns that shortcomings in the Air Force’s handling of nuclear weapons “resulted from an erosion of performance standards within the involved commands and a lack of effective Air Force leadership oversight.”167 Secretary Gates appointed a task force, led by former Secretary of Defense and Energy James Schlesinger, to provide “independent advice on the organizational, procedural and policy improvements necessary to ensure that the highest levels of accountability and control are maintained in the department’s stewardship of nuclear weapons, delivery vehicles, sensitive components and basing procedures.”168 Several of the studies that reviewed this event concluded that the Air Force leadership had lost its focus on the nuclear mission as it diverted resources to more pressing missions related to the ongoing conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan. As a result, the “nuclear enterprise” had been allowed to atrophy, with evident declines in morale, cohesion, and capability.169 These reports suggested that the United States restore its focus on the nuclear mission and repair long-standing and often-identified deficiencies in manpower and training programs for crews that maintain and service nuclear weapons and operate nuclear-capable bombers. The studies identified a number of organizational changes to achieve these goals. For example, the Air Force has created a new Global Strike Command, based at Barksdale Air Force Base, that is responsible for both the ICBM force and the nuclear-capable bombers. This organization began its operations in early 2009. The Air Force has also established a new headquarters office in the Pentagon that will monitor and manage the resources and policies dedicated to the nuclear mission. The Air Force also altered its inspection program and its expectations for achievement during these inspections. In a study published in April 2011, the Defense Science Board reviewed and evaluated the changes Air Force had made in its nuclear weapons enterprise.170 The report noted that Air Force leadership “has taken decisive action to correct deficiencies, reinvigorate, and further strengthen the Air Force Nuclear Enterprise.”171 At the same time, though, the study noted that some of the “extraordinary measures” taken in response to the earlier lapses could have negative impacts if they are extended beyond the “period of urgent need.” This problem was particularly evident in the areas of oversight and inspection. The study reported that there has been “intense attention to 166 See, for example, The Defense Science Board Permanent Task Force on Nuclear Weapons Surety. Report on the Unauthorized Movement of Nuclear Weapons. February 2008. 167 Nuclear Lapses Trigger Ouster of Top U.S. Air Force Officials. Global Security Newswire. June 6, 2008. 168 Department of Defense. Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public Affairs), “Department of Defense Announces Task Force on Nuclear Weapons Management,” June 12, 2008. 169 See, for example, United States Air Force, Reinvigorating the Air Force Nuclear Enterprise, Prepared by the Air Force Nuclear Task Force, Washington, DC, October 24, 2008, https://fas.org/irp/doddir/usaf/nuclear.pdf. See also, Report of the Secretary of Defense Task Force on DOD Nuclear Weapons Management (the Schlesinger Commission), Phase I: The Air Force’s Nuclear Mission, Washington, DC, September 2008, http://www.defenselink.mil/pubs/Phase_I_Report_Sept_10.pdf. 170 Defense Science Board Permanent Task Force on Nuclear Weapons Surety, Independent Assessment of The Air force Nuclear Enterprise, Washington, DC, April 2011, https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a552762.pdf. 171 Ibid., p. 16. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 47 the issue of accountability and control of nuclear weapons-related materials.” But the numerous and overlapping inspections have become so frequent and invasive that the units may not have the time or resources to correct deficiencies found during the many inspections. As a result, the task force concluded that the intense level of inspections and exercises had become counterproductive by interfering with the normal rhythm of operations at the wings.172 Several incidents that occurred in 2013 and early 2014 raised new concerns about the capabilities and morale of ICBM launch officers. For example, press reports from May 2013 noted that the Air Force had removed 17 launch officers from duty at Minot Air Force Base and had sent them for additional training after they earned low scores on an inspection in March.173 In August, a missile unit at Malmstrom Air Force Base also received a failing grade on an inspection. Air Force officials expressed concern about these results, but noted that they remained confident in the capabilities of Air Force nuclear officers. After the incident in Minot, some saw the commander’s response, and the remedial action, as a sign of progress in the force, because problems were identified and corrected on site. Others have noted that unsatisfactory results in inspections may be the result of higher expectations, and do not necessarily indicate deeper problems. Others, however, view the low scores on inspections as a symptom of continuing problems in the force. In January 2014, press reports indicated that nuclear launch officers at Malmstrom Air Force Base had been implicated in a drug investigation. While investigating this charge, the Air Force discovered that 34 of launch officers may have been cheating on their monthly proficiency exams. In response to this event, Secretary of Defense Hagel ordered an internal review of nuclear weapons personnel issues and commissioned another outside study of morale and effectiveness in the nuclear enterprise. As this review proceeded, the Air Force questioned whether some officers in the nuclear force may be experiencing “burnout” and boredom in a mission that seemed connected to an earlier time and whether the tense atmosphere created by the frequent testing and inspection regimes has created incentives to cheat to produce perfect scores.174 The Air Force responded to these problems with plans to increase funding by nearly $8 billion over five years, beginning in FY2015, to raise pay levels, introduce new management positions, modify the testing process, and raise morale among Air Force ICBM officers. In its FY2018 budget request, the Air Force indicated that it planned to spend an additional $3 billion over the next five years. Many of these plans are designed to highlight the high value that Air Force places on the ICBM mission and to convince airmen that their leaders value their effort and accomplishment. At the same time, though, the changes will require additional funding, and the Air Force will need to request increases in its budget in an era of fiscal restraint to follow through on these initiatives. While the Air Force has increased funding and altered testing and training procedures to address many of these concerns, the Department of Defense has also sought to emphasize the value and priority placed on this mission within the department. For example, Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter visited Minot Air Force Base in September 2016, when he noted that “America’s nuclear deterrence is the bedrock of our security, and the highest priority mission of the Department of 172 Ibid., pp. 22-23. 173 Robert Burns, “Air Force Sidelines 17 ICBM launch officers: commander cites ‘rot’ within system,” Associated Press, May 8, 2013. 174 R. Jeffrey Smith, “Aiming High: Boredom, Drugs, Low Morale. The millennials of the U.S. nuclear missile corps are struggling to stay on high alert for a nuclear Armageddon,” Slate, April 2014. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 48 Defense.”175 Secretary of Defense Mark T. Esper conducted a similar visit to Minot in February 2020. In his comments, he noted that “the nuclear strategic triad is the most important part of our military … it provides that strategic nuclear deterrent that we depend on day after day, that we've depended on decade after decade.”176 In April 2020, the Pentagon outlined its plans to maintain the capabilities and readiness of the nuclear enterprise during the Covid-19 pandemic. On April 22, General John Hyten, the Vice-chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, announced that the Pentagon would expand its testing program for the virus using a four-tier system, with forces involved “in critical national capabilities such as strategic deterrence or nuclear deterrence” included in the first tier.177 The Air Force and Navy also outlined plans to monitor and quarantine airmen and sailors prior to their deployments to maintain deterrence and minimize the risk to force. Analysts have noted that some of these steps may have been easier to implement in the nuclear weapons community because it is designed to work autonomously and in isolation so that it can “keep operating even in the aftermath a nuclear conflict or amid a biological weapons attack.”178 Issues for Congress This report focuses on the numbers and types of weapons in the U.S. strategic nuclear force structure. It does not address the broader question of why the United States chooses to deploy these numbers and types of weapons, or more generally, the role that U.S. nuclear weapons play in U.S. national security strategy. However, as the Trump Administration reviews and possibly revises the plans for U.S. nuclear force structure, Congress could address broader questions about the relationship between these forces and the role of nuclear weapons. Force Size In 2001, the Bush Administration argued that, because the United States and Russia were no longer enemies, the United States would not size or structure its nuclear forces simply to deter the “Russian threat.” Instead, nuclear weapons would play a broader role in U.S. national security strategy. The Obama Administration, in contrast, noted that there is a relationship between the size of the U.S. arsenal and the size of the Russian arsenal. The 2010 NPR states that Russia’s nuclear force will remain a significant factor in determining how much and how fast we are prepared to reduce U.S. forces. Because of our improved relations, the need for strict numerical parity between the two countries is no longer as compelling as it was during the Cold War. But large disparities in nuclear capabilities could raise concerns on both 175 Ashton Carter, Sustaining Nuclear Deterrence, U.S. Department of Defense, Remarks, Minot, ND, September 26, 2016, https://www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Speeches/Speech/Article/956630/remarks-on-sustaining-nuclear-deterrence/. 176 Secretary of Defense Mark T. Esper, Media Availability at Minot AFB, Department of Defense, Minot, ND, February 19, 2020, https://www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Transcripts/Transcript/Article/2088918/secretary-of-defense-dr-mark-t-esper-media-availability-at-minot-afb/. 177 Jim Garamone, “DOD Starts Tiered COVID-19 Testing Process to Ensure Safety,” DOD News, April 22, 2020, https://www.defense.gov/Explore/News/Article/Article/2160008/dod-starts-tiered-covid-19-testing-process-to-ensure-safety/. 178 Bryan Bender, “How the nuclear force dodged the coronavirus,” Politico, April 23, 2020, https://www.politico.com/news/2020/04/23/nuclear-force-coronavirus-205230?utm_source=Sailthru&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=EBB%2004.24.20&utm_term=Editorial%20-%20Early%20Bird%20Brief. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 49 sides and among U.S. allies and partners, and may not be conducive to maintaining a stable, long-term strategic relationship, especially as nuclear forces are significantly reduced.179 The Trump Administration, in the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review, stated that the “global threat conditions have worsened markedly since the most recent, 2010 NPR.” It emphasized that “Russia and China are contesting the international norms” and that “Russia and North Korea have increased the salience of nuclear forces in their strategies and plans and have engaged in increasingly explicit nuclear threats.” As a result, it stated that the 2018 NPR is “strategy driven and provides guidance for the nuclear force structure and policy requirements needed now and in the future to maintain peace and stability in a rapidly shifting environment with significant future uncertainty.”180 The Bush Administration’s 2001 Nuclear Posture Review determined that the United States would need to maintain between 1,700 and 2,200 operationally deployed nuclear warheads. The Bush Administration also indicated that the United States would maintain in storage many of the warheads removed from deployed forces, and would maintain the capability to restore some of these warheads to the deployed forces to meet unexpected contingencies. The Obama Administration concluded, in its NPR, that the United States could reduce its forces to 1,550 deployed warheads, and agreed to do so under the New START Treaty, but it also planned to retain the capability to restore warheads to its deployed forces. It also planned to retain many warheads in storage.181 In 2013, the Obama Administration determined that the United States could reduce its numbers of deployed and nondeployed warheads further, but would only do so in parallel with Russia. In June 2013, the Department of Defense completed a new study, as a follow-up to the NPR, to determine how deeply the United States might reduce its forces, and how it should deploy the remaining forces. Press reports indicate the Pentagon reviewed a number of alternatives in this study, with some contemplating reductions as low as 300 warheads,182 but the Administration concluded that the United States could reduce U.S. deployed strategic forces by about one-third, to a level of 1,000-1,100 warheads, if it did so along with Russia. They United States would not proceed with unilateral cuts in the U.S. arsenal.183 The Trump Administration did not directly address questions about the size of the U.S. nuclear arsenal in the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review. It indicated that it would continue to support the implementation of New START, at least through 2021, and that it would continue to pursue the nuclear modernization programs that began during the Obama Administration. It stated that, as a part of this modernization program, the United States would deploy a minimum of 12 Columbia class submarines and 400 missiles within 450 launch facilities under the GBSD program.184 It did 179 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, April 6, 2010, p. 30, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/features/defenseReviews/NPR/2010_Nuclear_Posture_Review_Report.pdf. 180 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, pp. 2-3, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. 181 On May 3, 2010, the Obama Administration announced that the United States has 5,113 warheads in its stockpile of nuclear weapons. This number includes the deployed warheads, active nondeployed warheads and inactive nondeployed warheads. For more information, see http://www.defense.gov/npr/docs/10-05-03_Fact_Sheet_US_Nuclear_Transparency__FINAL_w_Date.pdf. 182 R. Jeffrey Smith, “Obama Embraces Big Nuke Cuts,” Foreign Policy, February 8, 2013. 183 Department of Defense, Report on Nuclear Employment Strategy of the United States, Washington, DC, June 12, 2013, p. 6, https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a590745.pdf. 184 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, pp. 49-50, U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 50 not, however, offer recommendations on the numbers of warheads that would be deployed on these missiles or indicate whether the United States would remain within the limits established by New START after the treaty expired. In 2018, Rear Admiral John Tammen, the Navy’s director for submarine warfare, said that the Navy would keep the production line for Columbia class submarines open, after completing the 12 submarines, to maintain the option of increasing the size of the fleet.185 Moreover, the Navy’s 30-year shipbuilding plan includes a line for 5 additional heavy missile submarines, after the completion of the Columbia class program, that might serve as replacements for the Ohio-class cruise missile submarines. Also in 2018, General John Hyten, then the Commander of U.S. Strategic Command, noted that the size and structure of the U.S. nuclear force is determined by the threats faced by the United States. He noted that, if the United States wanted to reduce the size of the force and curtail spending on nuclear modernization, it would have to reduce the threat, possibly by “renegotiating arms control treaties to further reduce the nuclear arsenals of the United States and Russia.”186 Over the years, analysts have questioned why the United States must maintain a large force of nuclear weapons. They have questioned whether the United States would attack with such a large number of weapons if its own national survival were not at risk, and they note that only Russia currently has the capability to threaten U.S. national survival. They assert that the United States could likely meet any other potential contingency with a far smaller force of nuclear weapons. Some have concluded, instead, that the United States could maintain its security with a force of between 500 and 1,000 warheads.187 Others, however, dispute this view and note that the United States has other potential adversaries, and, even if these nations do not possess thousands of nuclear warheads, some may expand their nuclear forces or chemical and biological capabilities in the future. Some have argued that the United States also needs to assure its allies of its commitment to their security, and this goal could require a force of significant size, regardless of the number of potential targets an adversary nation might possess. They also argue that a “minimum deterrent” of only a few hundred warheads would require a strategy of targeting an adversary’s cities and population centers, rather than military capabilities. They note that this strategy has been rejected by both Republican and Democratic Administrations throughout the nuclear age.188 Force Structure When the Bush Administration announced the results of the 2001 Nuclear Posture Review, it indicated that the United States would retain a triad of ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers for https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. 185 Richard R. Burgess, “Navy Submarine Warfare Director: Navy to Keep Columbia SSBN Line ‘Hot’ After 12th Boat,” Seapower, November 8, 2018. http://seapowermagazine.org/stories/20181108-Columbia.html?platform=hootsuite. 186 Valerie Insinna, “STRATCOM head on key lawmaker’s arms control agenda: ‘If you want to save money, change the threat’,” Defense News, November 15, 2018. https://www.defensenews.com/space/2018/11/15/stratcom-head-on-key-lawmakers-arms-control-agenda-if-you-want-to-save-money-change-the-threat/. 187 See, for example, Sidney D. Drell and James E. Goodby. What Are Nuclear Weapons For? Recommendations for Restructuring U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces. Arms Control Association, Updated October 2007. 188 Dr. Keith B. Payne, Why Do US Nuclear Force Numbers Matter for Deterrence?, National Insititue for Public Policy, Information Series, Washington, DC, March 9, 2016, http://www.nipp.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/IS-404.pdf. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 51 the foreseeable future. The Obama Administration also offered continuing support for the retention of the strategic triad. Robert Scher, then the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Strategy, Plans, and Capabilities, reiterated the Obama Administration’s support for the nuclear triad in testimony before Congress. He argued that the United States needed to “maintain a deterrent that is inherently robust and stable,” even though the United States did not need “to mirror every potential adversary, system-for-system or yield-for-yield.” He indicated that the Obama Administration believed that the triad continued to “provide the credibility, flexibility, and survivability to meet and adapt to the challenges of a dynamic 21st century security environment.”189 The 2018 Nuclear Posture Review offers a similar justification for retaining the nuclear triad. It notes that “the triad’s synergy and overlapping attributes help ensure the enduring survivability of our deterrence capabilities against attack and our capacity to hold a range of adversary targets at risk throughout a crisis or conflict. Eliminating any leg of the triad would greatly ease adversary attack planning and allow an adversary to concentrate resources and attention on defeating the remaining two legs.” It also lists additional capabilities and attributes that it views as essential to meeting U.S. deterrence needs, and argues that “the multiplicity of platforms, weapons, and modes of operation inherent in the triad and U.S. non-strategic nuclear forces, provide a significant margin of flexibility and resilience.”190 Congress has also offered its support for the retention of the nuclear triad. The FY2017 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 114-328, Section 1671) states the modernization of the nuclear triad is a key element “in support of a strong and credible nuclear deterrent.” The Trump Administration is also likely to continue to support the nuclear triad. Although, as a candidate, President Trump seemed unfamiliar with the concept of the triad, Secretary of Defense Mattis offered his support during his confirmation hearings in January 2017. As the Obama Administration outlined plans to modernize and replace the delivery vehicles in all three legs of the strategic triad, many analysts began to question whether the United States could afford to retain the triad and whether it could retain a robust deterrent without one of the current types of strategic delivery vehicles.191 Specifically, some called for reductions in or even the elimination of the U.S. ICBM force. Others noted that, with financial pressures and restricted Pentagon budgets, the Air Force may not be able to afford a new ICBM after 2030. Moreover, even if the financial pressures did not exist, some argued the Air Force should eliminate the ICBM force because it no longer served U.S. national security needs. For example, in a study published in May 2012,192 the Global Zero Organization argued for the elimination of the ICBM force because it views these missiles as dangerous and destabilizing in the current security environment. It noted that “ICBMs can only support nuclear wartime operations against Russia” and that current-generation ICBMs “fired from the existing bases, on their minimum energy trajectories,” have to overfly Russia and China or fly near Russia to reach targets in potentially adversarial countries. It contended that, if U.S. missiles fly over or near Russia on their way to more southerly targets in Iran or Syria, Russia might be confused by ambiguous attack indications 189 U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Armed Services, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces, Nuclear Acquisition Programs and the Nuclear Doctrine, Hearing, 114th Cong., 2nd sess., February 9, 2016. 190 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, p. 43, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. 191 Mark Thompson, “Nuclear Triad Warfare,” Time Magazine, October 18, 2011. 192 Global Zero U.S. Nuclear Policy Commission, Modernizing U.S. Nuclear Strategy, Force Structure, and Posture, Global Zero, Washington, DC, May 2012, https://www.princeton.edu/sgs/faculty-staff/bruce-blair/gz_us_nuclear_policy_report.pdf. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 52 and might then launch its own retaliatory attack against the United States. Second, the report asserted that, because ICBMs are based in fixed silos that are vulnerable to destruction in an attack, they must depend heavily upon “launch on warning” to survive and retaliate in some scenarios. As a result, according to the report, ICBMs exacerbate the risk that the United States might launch its weapons on false warning. Former Secretary of Defense William Perry has also questioned the future need for the ICBM force. He noted that ICBMs are not an essential part of the U.S. nuclear deterrent because the bomber force and SSBN force are sufficient to promise an overwhelming response if the United States is attacked. Specifically, he said that “any sane nation would be deterred by the incredible striking power of our submarine force.”193 He suggested that the United States could keep its ICBM force for a number of years, but that he would not recapitalize it through the GBSD program. Analysts who support the continued deployment of U.S. ICBMs dispute many of these assertions. First, they noted that, although each individual ICBM silo may be vulnerable to destruction if targeted by several incoming warheads, an attack that threatened to destroy the entire U.S. ICBM force would have to consist of hundreds, if not thousands of attacking warheads.194 This is because the United States maintains nearly 450 ICBM silos hardened against nuclear blast, and an attacker would have to target two or three warheads against each silo to ensure their destruction. Further, because the United States now deploys each Minuteman missile with only a single warhead, the attacker would have to expend two to three times as many warheads as he could hope to destroy. This calculation underpins the conclusion, which is widespread among nuclear policy analysts, that single-warhead ICBMs enhance stability and discourage attack because they are not lucrative targets.195 As General Robert Kehler, a former commander of U.S. STRATCOM, has noted, ICBMs remain “a mainstay of deterrence, as a hedge against unforeseen technical problems or geopolitical events, and as an enabler for other operational needs such as adjusting at-sea operations of the SSBN fleet when needed for major submarine maintenance or modernization.”196 Some analysts have also argued that the United States could reduce the size of its SLBM fleet and retain only 8 or 10 submarines. They argued that this reduction now, and the future acquisition of fewer replacement submarines, could save the Navy $6-$7 billion over the next 10 years.197 They also noted that this change need not reduce the number of operational warheads on SLBMs, because the United States could deploy each submarine with 24 missiles, rather than the 20 planned under New START, and could increase the number of warheads on each missile. However, with so few submarines, the United States might have to eliminate one of its submarine bases, leaving it with submarines based only in the Atlantic or only in the Pacific Ocean. Or the 193 Daniel Horner and Kingston Reif, “Lowering Nuclear Risks: An Interview with Former Secretary of Defense William Perry,” Arms Control Today, January/February 2016, http://www.armscontrol.org/ACT/2016_0102/Features/Interviews/Lowering-Nuclear-Risks-An-Interview-With-Former-Defense-Secretary-William-Perry. 194 See, for example, Senate ICBM Coalition, The Long Pole of the Nuclear Umbrella, A White Paper on the Criticality of the Intercontinental Ballistic Missile to the United States Security, Washington, DC, November 2009. See also, Peter Huessy, “In Defense of the Nuclear Triad.” Defense One, October 18, 2013, http://www.defenseone.com/ideas/2013/10/defense-nuclear-triad/72242/?oref=search_Huessy. 195 See, for example, the comments of General Larry Welch, before the NDIA and ROA Congressional Breakfast Seminar Series, May 25, 2012, http://www.afa.org/hbs/transcripts/5-25-2012%20Gen%20Larry%20Welch%20v2.pdf. 196 General C. Robert Kehler, USAF (ret.), The U.S. Needs a New ICBM Now, National Institute for Public Policy, Information Series, Fairfax, VA, August 2019, p. 3, https://www.nipp.org/2019/08/16/kehler-c-robert-the-u-s-needs-a-new-icbm-now/. 197 Daryl G. Kimball, “Defuse the Exploding Costs of Nuclear Weapons,” Arms Control Today, December 2012, p. 4. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 53 United States might have to reduce the number of submarines on station, and, therefore, the number of warheads available to the President promptly, at the start of a conflict. These changes may not be consistent with current submarine operations and employment plans. Analysts outside government have also questioned plans to replace the air-launched cruise missile (ALCM) with the new long-range strike missile (LRSO) in the 2020s. Some argue that this missile will be redundant, as the Air Force is already planning to deploy a new penetrating bomber. They note that, during the 1980s, the United States deployed cruise missiles both to extend the service life of the B-52 bombers, which could no longer penetrate Soviet air defenses, and to provide a means to attack and destroy those air defenses prior to follow-on attacks with penetrating bombers.198 But, according to the program’s critics, if the Air Force deploys 100 new bombers that can penetrate advanced air defenses, it will not need cruise missiles to destroy those defenses. Moreover, even if the United States does plan to attack an adversary’s air defenses, it could do so with existing conventional cruise missiles, such as the extended range version of the Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile (JASSM) missile.199 The Air Force has disputed the assertion that the bomber and cruise missile capabilities are redundant. Air Force officials have noted that the two systems are complementary, with each providing different capabilities for the United States and different profiles that would complicate an adversary’s attempts to defend against a U.S. attack.200 Some analysts also note that advanced air defense systems have proliferated among potential U.S. adversaries, and that these capabilities “make it harder for our forces to reach their targets.” Deploying both penetrating bombers and long-range cruise missiles, therefore, will strengthen the U.S. nuclear deterrent.201 In addition to debating the value of each of the legs of the nuclear triad, some analysts have addressed questions about whether the United States should develop and deploy new types of nuclear weapons in response to the challenges posed by emerging nuclear adversaries. Attention has focused, in particular, on lower-yield weapons. Some argue that these weapons would strengthen deterrence by giving the United States more limited, tailored, and, therefore, credible options for nuclear use than are currently available with higher-yield weapons.202 Others, however, argue that the deployment of low-yield nuclear weapons could undermine deterrence and make nuclear war more likely, because they might be seen as a more “usable” nuclear weapons. Press reports indicate that a Defense Science Board study completed in December 2016 called for the Pentagon to consider the deployment of lower-yield nuclear weapons and the development of options for the limited use of nuclear weapons.203 In early February 2017, General David 198 William J. Perry and Andy Weber, “Mr. President, kill the new cruise missile,” Washington Post, October 15, 2015. See, also, Tom Nichols, “The 1980s Called. “They Don’t Need Their Cruise Missile Back.” The National Interest, November, 3, 2015. 199 Hans Kristensen, “LRSO—The Nuclear Cruise Missile Mission,” Strategic Security Blog, Federation of American Scientists, October 20, 2015. http://fas.org/blogs/security/2015/10/lrso-mission/. 200 Bryan Bender, “Air Force Questions Call to Cancel new Nuclear-Armed Cruise Missile,” Politico, October 25, 2015. 201 Mel Deaile and Al Mauroni, “Why We Still Need a Nuclear-Armed Cruise Missile,” War on the Rocks, October 26, 2015. http://warontherocks.com/2015/10/why-we-still-need-a-nuclear-armed-cruise-missile/. 202 Clark Murdock et al., “Project Atom: A Competitive Strategies Approach to Defining U.S. Nuclear Strategy and Posture for 2025-2050,” CSIS, May 2015, https://csis-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/publication/150716_Murdock_ProjectAtom_Web_Rev2.pdf. 203 John M. Donnelly, “Pentagon Panel Urges Trump Team to Expand Nuclear Options,” CQ Roll Call, February 2, 2017. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 54 Goldfein, the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, indicated that he also thought the nuclear posture review should consider the development of lower-yield warheads, as a part of a new look at “what constitutes deterrence in the 21st century.”204 The Trump Administration addressed this issue during its Nuclear Posture Review and concluded that “in the near-term, the United States will modify a small number of existing SLBM warheads to provide a low-yield option.” This is the W76-2 warhead described above, which is now deployed on a small number of Trident II D-5 missiles. The NPR noted that the United States has long maintained cruise missile warheads and B61 bombs that provide a low-yield option, but argued that a low-yield SLBM warhead will “ensure a prompt response option that is able to penetrate adversary defenses.”205 The NPR asserted that this “supplement” to the U.S. nuclear force posture would enhance deterrence by “denying potential adversaries any mistaken confidence that limited nuclear employment can provide a useful advantage over the United States and its allies.” The NPR’s rationale for a new low-yield SLBM warhead differs, in some respects, from the debate evident in the literature over the past few years. Where the previous debate focused on the possible need for a low-yield warhead in regional scenarios, the NPR specifically points to Russia’s nuclear doctrine and Russia’s purported “escalate to de-escalate strategy” as the justification for this warhead. The NPR argues that Russia “mistakenly assesses that the threat of nuclear escalation or actual first use of nuclear weapons would serve to ‘de-escalate’ a conflict on terms favorable to Russia.”206 The NPR, therefore, “concluded that a new capability was required to ensure the Russian leadership does not miscalculate regarding the consequences of limited nuclear first use.... Russia must instead understand that nuclear first use, however limited, will fail to achieve its objectives, fundamentally alter the nature of a conflict, and trigger incalculable and intolerable costs for Moscow.” According to one analyst, by modifying a small number of W-76 warheads, the United States will “strengthen Russian perceptions of U.S. credibility and will.”207 Analysts outside government have raised a number of concerns about the possible deployment of a low-yield version of the W76 warhead.208 Some have argued that, because the United States already has warheads with low-yield options on cruise missiles and B61 bombs, it already has the flexibility and means to deter Russia’s escalation to low-yield nuclear weapons during a conventional conflict. Others argue that the new warhead will add little to the U.S. deterrent capability because Russia would be unable to determine the yield of an attacking warhead until it had detonated. Moreover, if Russia could not determine the yield of the warhead, and chose to retaliate before assessing the yield, the U.S. use of a low-yield warhead could lead Russia to escalate to a much broader and more destructive nuclear conflict. Those who support the W76-2 warhead have responded to these concerns by noting that Russia is not likely to escalate to full-scale nuclear war before confirming the nature of the U.S. attack. In addition, some have pointed out that because the U.S. goal is to deter Russian nuclear use in the first place, concerns about how the war might unfold if deterrence failed are highly speculative. 204 John M. Donnelly, “Top Air Force General Open to Changes in Nuclear Arms,” CQ Roll Call, February 7, 2017. 205 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, pp. 54-55, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. 206 Ibid., p. 8. 207 Frank Miller, “Addressing Fears About the Nuclear Posture Review and Limited Nuclear Use,” War on the Rocks, February 28, 2018, https://warontherocks.com/2018/02/addressing-fears-nuclear-posture-review-limited-nuclear-use/?utm_content=buffer7699f&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer. 208 For a summary of the issues raised during the debate on low-yield SLBM warheads, see CRS In Focus IF11143, A Low-Yield, Submarine-Launched Nuclear Warhead: Overview of the Expert Debate, by Amy F. Woolf. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 55 They believe that a U.S. low-yield warhead would raise the nuclear threshold because the United States would be more likely to respond to Russia’s use of low-yield nuclear weapons if it had a low-yield option of its own. Because Russia would know that the United States had this option, Russia would be less likely to escalate to nuclear use during a conventional conflict. The Cost of Nuclear Weapons When the Obama Administration submitted the 1251 report to the Senate during the New START ratification process, it indicated that it expected to spend around $210 billion over 10 years (2011-2021) to maintain and modernize the U.S. nuclear arsenal. This total covered mostly research and development funding, but not the costs of producing and procuring the next generation of submarines, bombers, and missiles, as these activities would occur after the timeframe contained in the report. Moreover, it became evident, as Congress reviewed the Administration’s plans to modernize the nuclear enterprise, that it was difficult to determine how much the United States spent each year on nuclear weapons, as the funding was divided between the Department of Defense and the Department of Energy, and, in many cases, was combined with funding for other, nonnuclear activities. In other words, the United States does not maintain a single, unified budget for nuclear weapons and other nuclear activities. Consequently, in 2012, Congress directed the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) to estimate the costs of U.S. plans for operating, maintaining, and modernizing nuclear weapons, the delivery systems, and the DOE nuclear weapons complex over the next 10 years. CBO issued its report in late 2013.209 It found that the United States was likely to spend $355 billion over the next 10 years on its nuclear weapons enterprise. This total included $56 billion for command, control, communications, and early warning activities and $59 billion for additional costs based on historical cost growth of similar programs. Neither of these categories had been included in the Administration’s estimate in 2010. When CBO considered the same categories as the Administration, it estimated 10-year spending of $241 billion, a number close to the estimate provided by the Administration. CBO updated its estimate in January 2015, and reported that it calculated that the United States would spend $348 billion between 2015 and 2024; excluding command and control and cost growth, the total that was comparable to the Administration’s 2010 estimate was now $247 billion. CBO updated its report again in February 2017, estimating that the United States would spend $400 billion on nuclear weapons between 2017 and 2026. Congress also mandated that the DOD and DOE provide 10-year cost estimates of the expected costs of nuclear weapons programs, and that GAO evaluate the cost estimates. In July 2017, GAO released its review of the DOD and DOE combined report for FY2017. The combined report estimates that the costs of sustaining and modernizing nuclear delivery systems, the nuclear command and control system, the nuclear stockpile, and the nuclear security enterprise will total $342 billion between FY2017 and FY2026. Both the CBO studies and the DOD/DOE reports indicate that the United States is on track to spend, on average, $35-$40 billion per year as it sustains and modernizes its nuclear weapons programs. This indicates that the United States could spend at least $1-$1.2 trillion on nuclear weapons programs and modernization over the next 30 years. This estimate is consistent with others that have been presented by organizations outside government. For example, in January 2014, analysts at the James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies estimated that the United States might spend $1 trillion, or an average of just over $30 billion per year, over the next 30 209 Congressional Budget Office, Projected Costs of U.S. Nuclear Forces, 2014-2023, Washington, DC, December 2013, http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/12-19-2013-NuclearForces.pdf. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service 56 years, to modernize its nuclear enterprise.210 In addition, in a briefing prepared in May 2013, the Air Force estimated that the investments in nuclear modernization programs would peak in between 2025 and 2035, at approximately $30 billion per year.211 While there appears to be a broad base of agreement about the magnitude of the costs that the United States is likely to incur as it modernizes its nuclear arsenal, there has been less agreement about whether the United States can, or should, proceed with all of these programs. Many analysts have noted that, with the passage of the Budget Control Act in 2011, the amount of funding available for defense spending was $1 trillion lower than expected when the Obama Administration first outlined the nuclear modernization program. Consequently, rising costs for nuclear weapons programs could cut into funding for other Pentagon priorities. While Congress repeatedly raised the caps in the Budget Control Act, increasing spending on defense programs and reducing the pressure on the modernization programs, the problem may not disappear after the Budget Control Act expires in 2021. As noted in a recent report by a well-known budget analyst, the Trump Administration’s five-year defense spending plan remains relatively flat, and “a defense budget that roughly keeps pace with inflation means that the military loses buying power.”212 Representative Adam Smith, who chairs the House Armed Services Committee, has also questioned the costs and direction of the U.S. nuclear modernization programs. He has noted that “we need to take a responsible approach to the nuclear weapons enterprise, and recognize that the current $1.5 trillion plan to build new nuclear weapons and upgrade our nuclear weapons complex is unrealistic and unaffordable.”213 Others, however, argue that the United States not only can afford to bear the costs of these systems, but cannot afford the costs of failing to modernize its nuclear arsenal. Admiral Haney, then the Commander of Strategic Command, made this point in a hearing before the House Armed Services Committee in 2015, when he said that “achieving strategic deterrence in the 21st century requires continued investment in strategic capabilities and renewed multigenerational commitment of intellectual capital.” He noted that, as the modernization programs progressed, spending on nuclear weapons was likely to rise from around 2.5%-3% of DOD’s budget to around 5%-6% of that budget in the late 2020s to 2030s. When asked whether the United States could afford to make this investment, he noted that other nations have been modernizing their forces and continued to pose an “existential threat” to the United States. He noted that “in order to maintain and sustain its strategic stability, it’s very important that we have that kind of balance” with these nations.214 The 2018 Nuclear Posture Review offered a similar response to concerns about the cost of the nuclear modernization programs. It noted that DOD currently spends 2%-3% of its budget to maintain and operate the nuclear force; this will rise to about 6.4% of its budget at the 210 Jon B. Wolfsthal, Jeffrey Lewis, and Marc Quint, The Trillion Dollar Nuclear Triad, James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies, Monterey, CA, January 2014, http://www.nonproliferation.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/140107_trillion_dollar_nuclear_triad.pdf. 211 For a copy of General Kowalski’s briefing slides, see http://www.fas.org/programs/ssp/nukes/nuclearweapons/AFGSC-CommandBrief-May2013.pdf. 212 Mackenzie Eaglen, “Don’t Expect Any Trump Boost To Defense Spending,” Breaking Defense, November 19, 2018. https://breakingdefense.com/category/strategy-and-policy/. 213 Rachel Cohen, “Nuclear modernization programs could face renewed scrutiny in Democrat-controlled House,” Inside Defense, November 7, 2018. https://insidedefense.com/inside-air-force/nuke-programs-could-face-renewed-scrutiny-democrat-controlled-house. 214 U.S. Congress, House Committee on Armed Services, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces, President Obama’s Fiscal 2016 Budget Request on Strategic Forces, Hearing, 114th Cong., 1st sess., February 26, 2015. U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues Congressional Research Service RL33640 · VERSION 63 · UPDATED 57 “highpoint” of the modernization program.215 This total does not include the costs associated with NNSA’s life extension programs or the recommended investment in recapitalization of NNSA’s infrastructure. Moreover, although Congress has raised the caps in the Budget Control Act to allow for additional spending on defense, the analysis in the NPR does not address questions about whether the nuclear modernization will compete with other DOD priorities for scarce funding. The Covid-19 pandemic could eventually lead to reductions in defense spending as the United States sharply increases funding to support the broader economy, or reductions in procurement spending as the Pentagon seeks to bolster funding for personnel and readiness programs. Consequently, questions about the need for trade-offs in an environment of limited resources could again fuel debates about the scope of the nuclear modernization programs.216 Author Information Amy F. Woolf Specialist in Nuclear Weapons Policy Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 215 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, p. 51, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. 216 Joe Gould, “Storm clouds await Pentagon’s request for defense industry cash injection,” Defense News, April 27, 2020, https://www.defensenews.com/congress/2020/04/27/storm-clouds-await-pentagons-request-for-defense-industry-cash/#.XqcSJq0NxBM.twitter. 		2020-05-05T16:07:39-0400
The Army’s Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle (OMFV) Program: Background and Issues for Congress The Army’s Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle (OMFV) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Updated April 16, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov R45519 Congressional Research Service SUMMARY The Army’s Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle (OMFV) Program: Background and Issues for Congress In June 2018, in part due to congressional concerns, the Army announced a new modernization strategy and designated the Next Generation Combat Vehicle (NGCV) as the program to replace the M-2 Bradley. In October 2018, Army leadership decided to redesignate the NGCV as the Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle (OMFV) and to add additional vehicle programs to what would be called the NGCV Program. The M-2 Bradley, which has been in service since 1981, is an Infantry Fighting Vehicle (IFV) used to transport infantry on the battlefield and provide fire support to dismounted troops and suppress or destroy enemy fighting vehicles. Updated numerous times since its introduction, the M-2 Bradley is widely considered to have reached the technological limits of its capacity to accommodate new electronics, armor, and defense systems. Two past efforts to replace the M-2 Bradley—the Future Combat System (FCS) Program and the Ground Combat Vehicle (GCV) Program—were cancelled for programmatic and cost-associated reasons. In late 2018, the Army established Army Futures Command (AFC), intended to establish unity of command and effort while consolidating the Army’s modernization process under one roof. AFC is intended to play a significant role in OMFV development and acquisition. On March 29, 2019, the Army issued a Request for Proposal (RFP) to industry for the OMFV. The Army characterized its requirements as “aggressive” and noted industry might not be able to meet all requirements. On January 16, 2020, the Army canceled the current OMFV program, intending to restart the program following an analysis and revision of program requirements. According to Army officials, “a combination of requirements and schedule overwhelmed industry’s ability to respond within the Army’s timeline.” On February 7, 2020, the Army reopened the OMFV competition by releasing a new market survey with a minimally prescriptive wish list and an acquisition strategy that shifted most of the initial cost burden to the Army. On April 9, 2020, the Army provided new OMFV program guidance to industry featuring a five-phased approach to acquisition as well as a pledge to “reduce foreign barriers to competition,” and “identify a pathway to integrate relevant but immature technologies” into the program. The Army requested $327.732 million in Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation (RDT&E) funding for the OMFV program in its FY2021 budget request. Potential issues for Congress include the Army’s new OMFV Acquisition Strategy and OMFV program decisionmaking authority. R45519 April 16, 2020 Andrew Feickert Specialist in Military Ground Forces The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Contents Why Is This Issue Important to Congress? ...................................................................................... 1 The Next Generation Combat Vehicle (NGCV) Becomes the Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle (OMFV) ........................................................................................................................... 1 Report Focus on OMFV ............................................................................................................ 1 Preliminary OMFV Requirements................................................................................................... 2 Background ..................................................................................................................................... 3 The Army’s Current Infantry Fighting Vehicle (IFV) ............................................................... 3 M-2 Limitations and the Need for a Replacement .................................................................... 3 Past Attempts to Replace the M-2 Bradley IFV ........................................................................ 4 Why the FCS and GCV Programs Were Cancelled .................................................................. 4 FCS ..................................................................................................................................... 4 GCV .................................................................................................................................... 4 After the Ground Combat Vehicle (GCV): The Next Generation Combat Vehicle (NGCV) Program ........................................................................................................................................ 5 Army Futures Command (AFC) and Cross-Functional Teams (CFTs) ........................................... 5 Army Futures Command ........................................................................................................... 5 Cross-Functional Teams (CFTs) ................................................................................................ 6 Army’s Original OMFV Acquisition Approach .............................................................................. 7 Original OMFV Acquisition Plan ............................................................................................. 8 Secretary of the Army Accelerates the Program ....................................................................... 8 Army Issues OMFV Request for Proposal (RFP) ..................................................................... 9 Potential OMFV Candidates ..................................................................................................... 9 BAE Systems ...................................................................................................................... 9 BAE Decides Not to Compete for the OMFV Contract .......................................................... 10 General Dynamics Land Systems (GDLS) ....................................................................... 10 Raytheon/Rheinmetall........................................................................................................ 11 Army Disqualifies Raytheon/Rheinmetall Lynx Prototype ...................................................... 11 Recent Program Activities ............................................................................................................. 12 Army Cancels OMFV Program ............................................................................................... 12 Army Restarts OMFV Program .............................................................................................. 13 New OMFV Program Guidance .............................................................................................. 13 FY2021 OMFV Budget Request ................................................................................................... 14 Potential Issues for Congress......................................................................................................... 14 The Army’s New OMFV Acquisition Strategy ....................................................................... 14 OMFV Program Decisionmaking Authority ........................................................................... 15 Figures Figure 1. DOD Systems Acquisition Framework ............................................................................ 7 Figure 2. BAE Prototype CV-90 .................................................................................................... 10 Figure 3. GDLS Griffin III Prototype ............................................................................................. 11 Figure 4. Raytheon/Rheinmetall Lynx Prototype .......................................................................... 12 The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Contacts Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 15 The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 1 Why Is This Issue Important to Congress? The Army’s Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle (OMFV) is the Army’s third attempt to replace the M-2 Bradley Infantry Fighting Vehicle (IFV) which has been in service since the early 1980s. Despite numerous upgrades since its introduction, the Army contends the M-2 is near the end of its useful life and can no longer accommodate the types of upgrades needed for it to be effective on the modern battlefield. Because the OMFV would be an important weapon system in the Army’s Armored Brigade Combat Teams (ABCTs), Congress may be concerned with how the OMFV would impact the effectiveness of ground forces over the full spectrum of military operations. Moreover, Congress might also be concerned with how much more capable the OMFV is projected to be over the M-2 Bradley to ensure that it is not just a costly marginal improvement over the current system. A number of past unsuccessful Army acquisition programs have served to heighten congressional oversight of Army programs, and the OMFV may be subject to a high degree of congressional interest. The Next Generation Combat Vehicle (NGCV) Becomes the Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle (OMFV) In June 2018, the Army established the Next Generation Combat Vehicle (NGCV) program to replace the M-2 Bradley Infantry Fighting Vehicle (IFV), which has been in service since the early 1980s. In October 2018, Army leadership reportedly decided to redesignate the NGCV as the Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle (OMFV) and add additional vehicle programs to what would be called the NGCV Program.1 Under the new NGCV Program, the following systems are planned for development:  The Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle (OMFV): the M-2 Bradley IFV replacement.  The Armored Multi-Purpose Vehicle (AMPV):2 the M-113 vehicle replacement.  Mobile Protected Firepower (MPF):3 a light tank for Infantry Brigade Combat Teams (IBCTs).  Robotic Combat Vehicles (RCVs): three versions, Light, Medium, and Heavy.  The Decisive Lethality Platform (DLP): the M-1 Abrams tank replacement. Report Focus on OMFV Because AMPV and MPF are discussed in earlier CRS reports and the OMFV is in the early stages of development, the remainder of this report focuses on the OMFV. Because the DLP is 1 Ashley Tressel, “MPF, AMPV Now Part of NGCV Family of Vehicles,” InsideDefense.com, October 12, 2018. 2 For additional information on the AMPV, see CRS Report R43240, The Army’s Armored Multi-Purpose Vehicle (AMPV): Background and Issues for Congress, by Andrew Feickert. 3 For additional information on MPF, see CRS Report R44968, Infantry Brigade Combat Team (IBCT) Mobility, Reconnaissance, and Firepower Programs, by Andrew Feickert. The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 2 intended to replace the Army’s second major ground combat system—the M-1 Abrams Tank—it will be addressed in a separate CRS report in the future. Preliminary OMFV Requirements4 The Army’s preliminary basic operational requirements for the OMFV included the following:  Optionally manned. It must have the ability to conduct remotely controlled operations while the crew is off-platform.5  Capacity. It should eventually operate with no more than two crewmen and possess sufficient volume under armor to carry at least six soldiers.  Transportability. Two OMFVs should be transportable by one C-17 and be ready for combat within 15 minutes.  Dense urban terrain operations and mobility. Platforms should include the ability to super elevate weapons and simultaneously engage threats using main gun and an independent weapons system.  Protection. It must possess requisite protection to survive on the contemporary and future battlefield.  Growth. It should possess sufficient size, weight, architecture, power, and cooling for automotive and electrical purposes to meet all platform needs and allow for preplanned product improvements.  Lethality. It should apply immediate, precise, and decisively lethal extended range medium-caliber, directed energy, and missile fires in day/night/all-weather conditions, while moving and/or stationary against moving and/or stationary targets. The platform should allow for mounted, dismounted, and unmanned system target handover.  Embedded platform training. It should have embedded training systems that have interoperability with the Synthetic Training Environment.  Sustainability. Industry should demonstrate innovations that achieve breakthroughs in power generation and management to obtain increased operational range and fuel efficiency, increased silent watch, part and component reliability, and significantly reduced sustainment burden. Additional requirements included the capacity to accommodate6  reactive armor,  an Active Protection System (APS), 4 Bob Purtiman, “Preparing for Future Battlefield: The Next Generation Combat Vehicle,” Army News, September 17, 2018. 5 For additional information on autonomous systems, see CRS Report R45392, U.S. Ground Forces Robotics and Autonomous Systems (RAS) and Artificial Intelligence (AI): Considerations for Congress, coordinated by Andrew Feickert. 6 Project Manager NGCV, NGCV OMFV Industry Day Briefing, August 6, 2018, and David Vergun, “Next Generation Combat Vehicle Must be Effective in Mega Cities, FORSCOM Commander Says,” Army News, November 30, 2017. The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 3  artificial intelligence,7 and  directed-energy weapons8 and advanced target sensors. Background The Army’s Current Infantry Fighting Vehicle (IFV) The M-2 Bradley is an Infantry Fighting Vehicle (IFV) used to transport infantry on the battlefield and provide fire support to dismounted troops and suppress or destroy enemy fighting vehicles. The M-2 has a crew of three—commander, gunner, and driver—and carries seven fully equipped infantry soldiers. M-2 Bradley IFVs are primarily found in the Army’s Armored Brigade Combat Teams (ABCT). The first M-2 prototypes were delivered to the Army in December 1978, and the first delivery of M-2s to units started in May 1981. The M-2 Bradley has been upgraded often since 1981.9 M-2 Limitations and the Need for a Replacement Despite numerous upgrades over its lifetime, the M-2 Bradley has what some consider a notable limitation. Although the M-2 Bradley can accommodate seven fully equipped infantry soldiers, infantry squads consist of nine soldiers. As a result, “each mechanized [ABCT] infantry platoon has to divide three squads between four Bradleys, meaning that all the members of a squad are not able to ride in the same vehicle.”10 This limitation raises both command and control and employment challenges for Bradley-mounted infantry squads and platoons. The M-2 Bradley first saw combat in 1991 in Operation Desert Storm, where its crews were generally satisfied with its performance.11 The M-2’s service in 2003’s Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) was also considered satisfactory. However, reports of vehicle and crew losses attributed to mines, improvised explosive devices (IEDs), and anti-tank rockets—despite the addition of reactive armor12 to the M-2—raised concerns about the survivability of the Bradley.13 Furthermore, the M-2 Bradley is reportedly reaching the technological limits of its capacity to accommodate new electronics, armor, and defense systems.14 By some accounts, M-2 Bradleys 7 For additional information on Army artificial intelligence efforts, see CRS Report R45392, U.S. Ground Forces Robotics and Autonomous Systems (RAS) and Artificial Intelligence (AI): Considerations for Congress, coordinated by Andrew Feickert. 8 For information on Army directed energy efforts, see CRS Report R45098, U.S. Army Weapons-Related Directed Energy (DE) Programs: Background and Potential Issues for Congress, by Andrew Feickert. 9 Sebastien Roblin, “The Army’s Plan for a Super Bradley Fighting Vehicle are Dead,” The National Interest, February 10, 2019. 10 Ibid. 11 United States Government Accountability Office (GAO), “Operation Desert Storm: Early Performance Assessment of Bradley and Abrams,” GAO/NSIAD-92-94, January 1992. 12 Reactive armor typically consists of a layer of high explosive between two metallic armor plates. When a penetrating weapon strikes the armor, the explosive detonates, thereby damaging the penetrator or disrupting the resulting plasma jet generated by the penetrator. 13 Sebastien Roblin, “The Army’s M-2 Bradley Fighting Vehicle is Old. What Replaces it Could be Revolutionary,” The National Interest, October 27, 2018. 14 Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “Army Pushes Bradley Replacement; Cautious on Armed Robots,” Breaking Defense, June 27, 2018. The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 4 during OIF routinely had to turn off certain electronic systems to gain enough power for anti-roadside-bomb jammers. Moreover, current efforts to mount Active Protection Systems (APS)15 on M-2 Bradleys to destroy incoming anti-tank rockets and missiles are proving difficult.16 Given its almost four decades of service, operational limitations, demonstrated combat vulnerabilities, and difficulties in upgrading current models, many argue the M-2 Bradley is a candidate for replacement. Past Attempts to Replace the M-2 Bradley IFV The Army has twice attempted to replace the M-2 Bradley IFV—first as part of the Future Combat System (FCS) Program,17 which was cancelled by the Secretary of Defense in 2009, and second with the Ground Combat Vehicle (GCV) Program,18 cancelled by the Secretary of Defense in 2014. These cancellations, along with a series of high-profile studies, such as the 2011 Decker-Wagner Army Acquisition Review, have led many to call into question the Army’s ability to develop and field ground combat systems. Why the FCS and GCV Programs Were Cancelled FCS Introduced in 1999 by Army Chief of Staff General Eric Shinseki, FCS was envisioned as a family of networked manned and unmanned vehicles and aircraft for the future battlefield. The Army believed that advanced sensor technology would result in total battlefield awareness, permitting the development of lesser-armored combat vehicles and the ability to engage and destroy targets beyond the line-of-sight. However, a variety of factors led to the program’s cancellation, including a complicated, industry-led management approach; the failure of a number of critical technologies to perform as envisioned; and frequently changing requirements from Army leadership—all of which resulted in program costs increasing by 25%.19 After $21.4 billion already spent20 and the program only in the preproduction phase, then Secretary Gates restructured the program in 2009, effectively cancelling it.21 GCV22 Recognizing the need to replace the M-2 Bradley, as part of the FCS “restructuring,” the Army was directed by the Secretary of Defense in 2009 to develop a ground combat vehicle (GCV) that 15 For additional information on active protection systems, see CRS Report R44598, Army and Marine Corps Active Protection System (APS) Efforts, by Andrew Feickert. 16 Ibid. 17 For additional historical information on the Future Combat System, see CRS Report RL32888, Army Future Combat System (FCS) “Spin-Outs” and Ground Combat Vehicle (GCV): Background and Issues for Congress, by Andrew Feickert and Nathan J. Lucas. 18 For additional historical information on the Ground Combat Vehicle, see CRS Report R41597, The Army’s Ground Combat Vehicle (GCV) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Andrew Feickert. 19 Stephen Rodriguez, “Top Ten Failed Defense Programs of the RMA Era,” War on the Rocks, December 2, 2014. 20 United States Government Accountability Office (GAO), Army Modernization: Steps Needed to Ensure Army Futures Command Fully Applies Leading Practices, GAO-19-132, January 2019, p. 3. 21 Stephen Rodriguez, “Top Ten Failed Defense Programs of the RMA Era,” War on the Rocks, December 2, 2014. 22 Information in this section is taken directly from CRS Report R41597, The Army’s Ground Combat Vehicle (GCV) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Andrew Feickert. The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 5 would be relevant across the entire spectrum of Army operations, incorporating combat lessons learned in Iraq and Afghanistan. In 2010, the Army, in conjunction with the Pentagon’s acquisition office, conducted a review of the GCV program to “review GCV core elements including acquisition strategy, vehicle capabilities, operational needs, program schedule, cost performance, and technological specifications.” This review found that the GCV relied on too many immature technologies, had too many performance requirements, and was required by Army leadership to have too many capabilities to make it affordable. In February 2014, the Army recommended terminating the GCV program and redirecting the funds toward developing a next-generation platform.23 The cost of GCV cancellation was estimated at $1.5 billion.24 After the Ground Combat Vehicle (GCV): The Next Generation Combat Vehicle (NGCV) Program In the aftermath of the GCV program, the Army embarked on a Future Fighting Vehicle (FFV) effort in 2015. Army officials—described as “cautious” and “in no hurry to initiate an infantry fighting vehicle program”—instead initiated industry studies to “understand the trade space before leaping into a new program.”25 In general, Army combat vehicle modernization efforts post-FCS were characterized as upgrading existing platforms as opposed to developing new systems. This was due in part to reluctance of senior Army leadership, but also to significant budgetary restrictions imposed on the Army during this period. Some in Congress, however, were not pleased with the pace of Army modernization, reportedly noting the Army was “woefully behind on modernization” and was “essentially organized and equipped as it was in the 1980s.”26 In June 2018, in part due to congressional concerns, the Army announced a new modernization strategy and designated the NGCV as the second of its six modernization priorities.27 Originally, the NGCV was considered the program to replace the M-2 Bradley. Development of the NGCV would be managed by the Program Executive Officer (PEO) Ground Combat Systems, under the Assistant Secretary of the Army (ASA), Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology (ALT). Army Futures Command (AFC) and Cross-Functional Teams (CFTs) Army Futures Command28 In November 2017, the Army established a Modernization Task Force to examine the options for establishing an Army Futures Command (AFC) that would establish unity of command and effort as the Army consolidated its modernization process under one roof. Formerly, Army 23 Remarks by then-Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel FY2015 Budget Preview, Pentagon Press Briefing Room, Monday, February 24, 2014. 24 United States Government Accountability Office (GAO), Army Modernization: Steps Needed to Ensure Army Futures Command Fully Applies Leading Practices, GAO-19-132, January 2019, p. 3. 25 Sebastian Sprenger, “Army Bides its Time in Next Steps Toward Infantry Fighting Vehicle,” InsideDefense.com, June 10, 2015. 26 Association of the U.S. Army, “Milley: Readiness, with Needed Modernization, is a Top Priority,” March 1, 2016. 27 U.S. Army Modernization Strategy, June 6, 2018, https://www.army.mil/standto/2018-06-06. 28 Information in this section is taken directly from CRS Insight IN10889, Army Futures Command (AFC), by Andrew Feickert. The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 6 modernization activities were primarily spread among Forces Command (FORSCOM), Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), Army Materiel Command (AMC), Army Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC), and the Army Deputy Chief of Staff G-8.29 Intended to be a 4-star headquarters largely drawn from existing Army commands, AFC was planned to be established in an urban environment with ready access to academic, technological, and industrial expertise. On July 13, 2018, the Army announced that AFC would be headquartered in Austin, TX, and that it had achieved initial operating capability on July 1, 2018. AFC reached full operational capability on July 31, 2019.30 Sub-organizations, many of which resided within FORSCOM, TRADOC, and AMC, were transitioned to AFC. Cross-Functional Teams (CFTs) Army Futures Command intends to use what it calls Cross-Functional Teams (CFT) as part of its mission, which includes the development of NGCV. As a means to “increase the efficiency of its requirements and technology development efforts, the Army established cross-functional team pilots for modernization” in October 2017.31 These CFTs are intended to  leverage expertise from industry and academia;  identify ways to use experimentation, prototyping, and demonstrations; and  identify opportunities to improve the efficiency of requirements development and the overall defense systems acquisition process.32 The eight CFTs are  Long Range Precision Fires at Ft. Sill, OK;  Next Generation Combat Vehicle at Detroit Arsenal, MI;  Future Vertical Lift at Redstone Arsenal, AL;  Network Command, Control, Communication, and Intelligence at Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD;  Assured Positioning, Navigation and Timing at Redstone Arsenal, AL;  Air and Missile Defense at Ft. Sill, OK;  Soldier Lethality at Ft. Benning, GA; and  Synthetic Training Environment in Orlando, FL.33 CFTs are to be a part of AFC. Regarding the NGCV, program acquisition authority is derived from Assistant Secretary of the Army (ASA) for Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology (ALT), who is also the senior Army Acquisition Executive (AAE), to whom the Program Executive Officers (PEOs) report. AFC is to be responsible for requirements and to support PEOs. The 29 The Army G-8 is the Army’s lead for matching available resources to the defense strategy and the Army plan. They accomplish this through participation in Office of the Secretary of Defense–led defense reviews and assessments, the programming of resources, material integration, analytical and modeling capabilities, and the management of the Department of the Army studies and analysis. http://www.g8.army.mil/, accessed February 21, 2019. 30 Sean Kimmons, “In First Year, Futures Command Grows from 12 to 24,000 Personnel,” Army News Service, July 19, 2019. 31 United States Government Accountability Office (GAO), Army Modernization: Steps Needed to Ensure Army Futures Command Fully Applies Leading Practices, GAO-19-132, January 2019, p. 7. 32 Ibid., p. 8. 33 Ibid. The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 7 NGCV Program Manager (PM), who is subordinate to PEO Ground Combat Systems, is to remain under the control of ASA (ALT) but are to be teamed with CFTs under control of the AFC.34 The Government Accountability Office (GAO) notes, however Army Futures Command has not yet established policies and procedures detailing how it will execute its assigned mission, roles, and responsibilities. For example, we found that it is not yet clear how Army Futures Command will coordinate its responsibilities with existing acquisition organizations within the Army that do not directly report to it. One such organization is the Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Acquisition, Logistics and Technology [ASA (ALT)]—the civilian authority responsible for the overall supervision of acquisition matters for the Army—and the acquisition offices it oversees.35 The Army’s explanation of how the NGCV program is to be administered and managed, along with GAO’s findings regarding AFC not yet having established policies and procedures, suggests a degree of uncertainty as to how the NGCV program was to be managed. Army’s Original OMFV Acquisition Approach36 Figure 1 depicts the Department of Defense (DOD) Systems Acquisition Framework, which illustrates the various phases of systems development and acquisitions and is applicable to the procurement of Army ground combat systems. Figure 1. DOD Systems Acquisition Framework Source: http://acqnotes.com/acqnote/acquisitions/acquisition-process-overview, accessed February 13, 2019. Notes: Each phase of the acquisition process has specific DOD regulations and federal statutes that must be met. At the end of each phase, there is a Milestone Review (A, B, C) to determine if the acquisition program has met these required regulations and statues to continue on into the next phase. Critical Development Document (CDD): The CDD specifies the operational requirements for the system that will deliver the capability that meets operational performance criteria specified in the Initial Capabilities Document (ICD). Preliminary Design Review (PDR): The PDR is a technical assessment that establishes the Allocated Baseline of a system to ensure a system is operationally effective. Request for Proposal (RFP): A RFP is a document that solicits proposal, often made through a bidding process, by an agency or company interested in procurement of a commodity, service, or valuable asset, to potential suppliers to submit business proposals. 34 U.S. Army Stand-To, Army Futures Command, March 28, 2018. 35 United States Government Accountability Office (GAO), Army Modernization: Steps Needed to Ensure Army Futures Command Fully Applies Leading Practices, GAO-19-132, January 2019, p. 14. 36 For additional information on defense acquisition, see CRS Report R44010, Defense Acquisitions: How and Where DOD Spends Its Contracting Dollars, by Moshe Schwartz, John F. Sargent Jr., and Christopher T. Mann. The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 8 Critical Design Review (CDR): A CDR is a multi-disciplined technical review to ensure that a system can proceed into fabrication, demonstration, and test and can meet stated performance requirements within cost, schedule, and risk. Production Readiness Review (PRR): The PRR assesses a program to determine if the design is ready for production. Original OMFV Acquisition Plan Reportedly, the original OMFV plan called for five years of Technology Development, starting in FY2019, and leading up to a FY2024 Milestone B decision to move the program into the Engineering and Manufacturing Development phase.37 If the Engineering and Manufacturing Development phase proved successful, the Army planned for a Milestone C decision to move the program into the Production and Deployment phase in FY2028, with the intent of equipping the first unit by FY2032.38 Secretary of the Army Accelerates the Program In April 2018, then-Secretary of the Army Mark Esper, noting that industry could deliver OMFV prototypes by FY2021, reportedly stated he wanted to accelerate the OMFV timeline.39 After examining a number of possible courses of action, the Army reportedly settled on a timeline that would result in an FY2026 fielding of the OMFV.40 This being the case, the Army reportedly would pursue a “heavily modified off-the-shelf model meaning a mature chassis and turret integrated with new sensors.”41 Reportedly, some Army officials suggested they would have liked to see a 50 mm cannon on industry-proposed vehicles.42 Under this new acquisition approach, the Army planned to  award up to two vendors three-year Engineering and Manufacturing Development (EMD) contracts in the first quarter of FY2020;  if EMD is successful, make a Milestone C decision to move the program into the Production and Development phase in the third quarter of FY2023; and  equip first units in the first quarter of FY2026.43 37 Ashley Tressel, “How the Army Secretary Accelerated Service’s New Combat Vehicle Program,” InsideDefense.com, November 20, 2018. 38 Ibid. 39 Ibid. 40 Ibid. 41 Ibid. 42 Ibid. 43 Project Manager NGCV, NGCV OMFV Industry Day Briefing, August 6, 2018, p. 9. The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 9 Army Issues OMFV Request for Proposal (RFP)44 On March 29, 2019, the Army issued a Request for Proposal (RFP)45 to industry for the OMFV. The Army has characterized its requirements as “aggressive” and noted industry might not be able to meet all requirements. Major requirements included the ability to transport two OMFVs in a C-17 aircraft which will likely require the vehicle to have the ability to accommodate add-on armor; a threshold (minimum) requirement for a 30 mm cannon and a second generation forward-looking infra-red radar (FLIR); and objective (desired) requirements for a 50 mm cannon and a third generation FLIR. By October 1, 2019, industry was required to submit prototype vehicles to the Army for consideration and in the second quarter of FY2020, the Army planned to select two vendors to build 14 prototypes for further evaluation. Potential OMFV Candidates Reportedly, the Army originally planned to award a production contract for up to 3,590 OMFVs to a single vendor.46 Although the Army reportedly expected five to seven vendors to compete for the OMFV EMD contract, three vendors showcased prospective platforms in the fall of 2018.47 BAE Systems BAE Systems had proposed its fifth-generation CV-90. The CV-90 was first fielded in Europe in the 1990s. The latest version mounted a 35 mm cannon provided by Northrop Grumman that can accommodate 50 mm munitions. The CV-90 featured the Israeli IMI Systems Iron Fist Active Protection System (APS). The CV-90 could accommodate a three-person crew and five infantry soldiers. 44 Information in this section is taken from Devon L. Suits, “Army Looking for Optionally-Manned Fighting Vehicle,” Army News Service, March 28, 2019; Connie Lee, “Breaking: Army to Release Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle RFP,” National Defense, March 27, 2019; Jen Judson, “Army Drops Request for Proposals to Build Next-Gen Combat Vehicle Prototypes,” Defense News.com, March 26, 2019: and Ashley Roque, “U.S. Army Releases OMFV RFP, Focusing on What is Deemed Realistically Obtainable,” Janes, Defemse Weekly, April 10, 2019, p. 11. 45 A Request for Proposal (RFP) is a solicitation used in negotiated acquisition to communicate government requirements to prospective contractor and to solicit proposals. At a minimum, solicitations shall describe the Government’s requirement, anticipated terms and conditions that will apply to the contract, information required in the offeror’s proposal, and (for competitive acquisitions) the criteria that will be used to evaluate the proposal and their relative importance. See DOD Acquisition Notes: http://acqnotes.com/acqnote/tasks/request-for-proposalproposal-development, accessed June 13, 2019. 46 Jason Sherman, “Army Tweaking NGCV Requirements, Requests for Proposals Following Recent Industry Parlay,” InsideDefense.com, October 5, 2018. 47 Information in this section is taken from Ashley Tressel, “Contractors Debut Possible Bradley Replacement Vehicles,” InsideDefense.com, October 19, 2018. The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 10 Figure 2. BAE Prototype CV-90 Source: https://www.baesystems.com/en-us/product/cv90, accessed January 31, 2019. BAE Decides Not to Compete for the OMFV Contract48 On June 10, 2019, BAE reportedly announced it would not compete for the OMFV contract suggesting the requirements and acquisition schedule “did not align with our current focus or developmental; priorities.”49 General Dynamics Land Systems (GDLS) GDLS proposed its Griffin III technology demonstrator, which used the British Ajax scout vehicle chassis. The Griffin III mounted a 50 mm cannon and could accommodate an APS and host unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). The Griffin II could accommodate a two-person crew and six infantry soldiers. 48 Ashley Tressel, “BAE Ducks Out of OMFV Competition,” InsideDefense.com, June 10, 2019. 49 Ibid. The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 11 Figure 3. GDLS Griffin III Prototype Source: Sydney J. Freedberg, “General Dynamics Land Systems Griffin III for U.S. Army’s Next Generation Combat Vehicle (NGCV),” October 8, 2018. Raytheon/Rheinmetall Raytheon/Rheinmetall proposed its Lynx vehicle. It could mount a 50 mm cannon and thermal sights, and could accommodate both APS and UAVs. Raytheon states that the Lynx can accommodate a nine-soldier infantry squad.50 Army Disqualifies Raytheon/Rheinmetall Lynx Prototype51 Reportedly, the Army disqualified the Raytheon/Rheinmetall bid because it failed to deliver a single OMFV prototype by October 1, 2019, as stipulated in the RFP, meaning only a single vendor—General Dynamics Land Systems (GDLS)—was left to compete for the EMD contract. Supposedly, Rheinmetall was unable to ship its Lynx prototype from Germany (although Rheinmetall shipped it to the United States in 2018) and asked the Army for a four-week extension so it could ship the vehicle to Aberdeen Proving Grounds in Maryland or, if that was not acceptable, arrange for the Army to take possession of the vehicle in Germany instead. Both requests by Rheinmetall were reportedly denied by the Army. Reportedly, the Army Acquisition Authority—the ASA (ALT)—was willing to grant a four-week extension, but Army Futures Command (AFC) insisted the Army adhere to the October 1, 2019, deadline.52 50 https://www.raytheon.com/capabilities/products/lynx-infantry-fighting-vehicle, accessed January 31, 2019. 51 Information in this section is taken from Jen Judson, “Lynx 41 Disqualified from Bradley Replacement Competition,” DefenseNews.com, October 4, 2019, and Sydney J. Freedberg, Jr., “Bradley Replacement: Army Risks Third Failure in a Row,” Breaking Defense, October 7, 2019. 52 Judson, “Lynx 41 Disqualified from Bradley Replacement Competition.” The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 12 Reportedly, a number of companies were interested in competing and submitting bids for the OMFV EMD contract but expressed concerns to the Army that meeting its requirements and timelines would not be possible and asked for extensions so they could submit bids. Some in industry reportedly had expressed their concerns to Army leadership that it would be difficult to meet approximately 100 mandatory vehicle requirements with a nondevelopmental vehicle prototype in the 15 months allotted.53 Figure 4. Raytheon/Rheinmetall Lynx Prototype Source: https://www.rheinmetall-defence.com/en/rheinmetall_defence/systems_and_products/vehicle_systems/armoured_tracked_vehicles/lynx/index.php, accessed January 31, 2019. Recent Program Activities Army Cancels OMFV Program54 Reportedly, on January 16, 2020, the Army canceled the current OMFV program, with the intent to restart the program following an analysis and revision of program requirements. According to Army officials, “a combination of requirements and schedule overwhelmed industry’s ability to respond within the Army’s timeline.”55 Others suggest that after the Army released its final RFP, several companies raised concerns with the Army about the requirement for vendors to produce a nondevelopmental prototype within 15 months, as previously noted, as well as the requirement to fit two OMFVs inside a C-17 aircraft.56 At the time of the cancellation, Army officials reportedly 53 Ibid. 54 Unless otherwise noted, information in this section is taken from Ashley Tressel, “Army Scraps OMFV Program to Start Competition Over,” InsideDefense.com, January 16, 2020. 55 Ibid. 56 Ashley Roque and Robin Hughes, “No Contest: Briefing: The U.S. Army’s OMFV Competition,” Jane’s Defence The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 13 would not commit to a timeline for a revised program or if it would affect the original fielding date of FY2026. Army officials characterized the program cancellation as positive, noting it would save $9 billion by cancelling the program early and that the decision to cancel demonstrated the value of AFC.57 Army Restarts OMFV Program58 Reportedly, on February 7, 2020, the Army reopened the OMFV competition by releasing a new market survey with a minimally prescriptive wish list and an acquisition strategy that shifted most of the initial cost burden to the Army, in what was described as “a bid to regain industry’s trust after a faulty start.”59 As part of the new acquisition strategy, the Army asked potential vendors to first submit a “rough digital prototype” and stated that the Army would not initially seek a target fielding date of FY2026. Also, the Army suggested the requirement to fit two OMFVs on a C-17 aircraft was not part of this new “wish list.” Reportedly, it is hoped this new acquisition approach will bring companies who initially bowed out of the previous competition back into the new competition. New OMFV Program Guidance60 On April 9, 2020, the Army released new OMFV program guidance to industry. Of note, the Army stated it now plans to “reduce foreign barriers to competition,” and “identify a pathway to integrate relevant but immature technologies” for the OMFV program. The Army currently plans for a five-phased approach to OMFV acquisition:  development and refinement OMFV acquisition and contracting strategies;  preliminary design;  detailed design;  prototype building and testing; and  production and fielding. The Army now plans to award the first contract in the fourth quarter of FY2021, with a second award planned for the second quarter of FY2023 and downselect to a single vendor in the second quarter of FY2027. The new program guidance also calls for a full-rate production decision in the third quarter of FY2029. The Army now plans for the first unit to be equipped in the fourth quarter of FY2028. Weekly, November 13, 2019, p. 27. 57 Ashley Tressel, “Army Scraps OMFV Program to Start Competition Over,” InsideDefense.com, January 16, 2020. 58 Information in this section, unless otherwise noted, is taken from Ashley Tressel, “Army Reopens Competition for Bradley Replacement,” InsideDefense.com, February 7, 2020. 59 Ibid. 60 Information in this section is taken from U.S. Army Document “Industry Day Narrative for Optionally Manned Fighting Vehicle (OMFV),” dated April 9, 2020, and Ashley Tressel, “Army Releases New Details on OMFV Competition,” InsideDefense.com, April 10, 2020. The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 14 FY2021 OMFV Budget Request61 The Army requested $327.732 million in Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation (RDT&E) funding for the OMFV program in its FY2021 budget request. Funding is planned to be used for, among other things, funding up to five vendors so they can prepare for their digital design submissions. Potential Issues for Congress The Army’s New OMFV Acquisition Strategy While there is not a great deal of public detail regarding the Army’s new OMFV acquisition strategy, in an interview the ASA (ALT) Dr. Bruce Jette briefly outlined the Army’s current plans as follows:62  The Army’s current plan is to choose up to five vendors for the original equipment manufacturer position, while also choosing up to five separate contractors interested in developing subcomponents.  Three of the five vendors would then move on to produce a “Detailed Digital Design” similar to a Critical Design Review (CDR), “where we prove out [that] all of the technologies that are being offered can be accomplished, that they can be fitted together, that they have open architectures, that there’s flexibility in the design.”63  Two of the vendors will then be funded to build physical prototypes, and “we’ll do all the standard things you do with physical prototypes—we will validate and verify what we learned in the modeling and simulation, and in the soldier touchpoint, we'll confirm that the things we found were feasible were in fact feasible.”64  After that, the Army will choose a single prime contractor and move the “characteristics” into a requirements document.  The Army would then, at that point, decide whether to move the program from a Middle-Tier Acquisition Authority65 to a Federal Acquisition Regulation-based contract and solidify a timeline. 61 Information in this section is taken from Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 Budget Estimates, Army, Justification Book of Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation, Army RDT&E – Volume II, Budget Activity 5, February 2020, pp. 497-506 and Ashley Tressel, “Army Projects $1B for OMFV Development over FYDP,” InsideDefense.com, March 19, 2019. 62 Ashley Tressel, “Army Reopens Competition for Bradley Replacement,” InsideDefense.com, February 7, 2020. 63 Ibid. 64 Ibid. 65 Middle Tier Acquisition (MTA) is a rapid acquisition interim approach that focuses on delivering capability in a period of two to five years. The interim approach was granted by Congress in the FY2016 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) Section 804 and is not be subject to the Joint Capabilities Integration Development System (JCIDS) and DOD Directive 5000.01 “Defense Acquisition System.” The approach consists of utilizing two acquisition pathways: (1) Rapid Prototyping and (2) Rapid Fielding. It does this by streamlining the testing and deployment of prototypes or upgrading existing systems with already proven technology. See AcqNotes, http://acqnotes.com/acqnote/acquisitions/middle-tier-acquisitions, accessed February 14, 2020. The Army’s OMFV Program: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service R45519 · VERSION 11 · UPDATED 15 While this tentative plan is useful, it can be argued that for a potentially $45 billion program,66 a more detailed plan is necessary for oversight—particularly in light of this initial program misstep by the Army. While the Army’s April 9, 2020, revised program guidance to industry does provide some additional context and tentative dates, the guidance’s new proposed five program phases arguably lack the level detail needed for program oversight. In this regard, Congress might decide to require the Army to submit a more detailed plan. OMFV Program Decisionmaking Authority As part of the Army’s detailed new OMFV acquisition strategy, given previously discussed concerns over AFC’s programmatic role and decisionmaking authorities, it could be useful if the Army designates who—the ASA (ALT) or Commander, AFC—will make programmatic decisions by acquisition phase or activity. Given the alleged disagreement between the ASA (ALT) and Commander, AFC, over disqualifying Raytheon/Rheinmetall in the previous OMFV program, a clear delineation of program decisionmaking authority by acquisition phase or activity could assist policymakers in their oversight of the program. In addition, it might also be beneficial to designate who will make the final decision over modifying, adding, or eliminating OMFV operational requirements. Author Information Andrew Feickert Specialist in Military Ground Forces Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 66 Jason Sherman, “Army Estimates $45 Billion Total Price Tag – or $11 Million per Vehicle – for OMFV,” InsideDefense.com, October 11, 2019. 		2020-04-16T09:07:48-0400
Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Updated April 28, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov R41153 Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Summary The diminishment of Arctic sea ice has led to increased human activities in the Arctic, and has heightened interest in, and concerns about, the region’s future. The United States, by virtue of Alaska, is an Arctic country and has substantial interests in the region. The seven other Arctic states are Canada, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Denmark (by virtue of Greenland), and Russia. The Arctic Research and Policy Act (ARPA) of 1984 (Title I of P.L. 98-373 of July 31, 1984) “provide[s] for a comprehensive national policy dealing with national research needs and objectives in the Arctic.” The National Science Foundation (NSF) is the lead federal agency for implementing Arctic research policy. Key U.S. policy documents relating to the Arctic include National Security Presidential Directive 66/Homeland Security Presidential Directive 25 (NSPD 66/HSPD 25) of January 9, 2009; the National Strategy for the Arctic Region of May 10, 2013; the January 30, 2014, implementation plan for the 2013 national strategy; and Executive Order 13689 of January 21, 2015, on enhancing coordination of national efforts in the Arctic. The office of the U.S. Special Representative for the Arctic has been vacant since January 20, 2017. The Arctic Council, created in 1996, is the leading international forum for addressing issues relating to the Arctic. The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) sets forth a comprehensive regime of law and order in the world’s oceans, including the Arctic Ocean. The United States is not a party to UNCLOS. Record low extents of Arctic sea ice over the past decade have focused scientific and policy attention on links to global climate change and projected ice-free seasons in the Arctic within decades. These changes have potential consequences for weather in the United States, access to mineral and biological resources in the Arctic, the economies and cultures of peoples in the region, and national security. The geopolitical environment for the Arctic has been substantially affected by the renewal of great power competition. Although there continues to be significant international cooperation on Arctic issues, the Arctic is increasingly viewed as an arena for geopolitical competition among the United States, Russia, and China. Russia in recent years has enhanced its military presence and operations in the Arctic. China’s growing activities in the Arctic have become a matter of increasing curiosity or concern among observers. U.S. military forces have begun to pay more attention to the Arctic in their planning and operations. The Department of Defense (DOD), the Navy, and the Coast Guard have all issued Arctic strategy documents in recent years. Whether DOD and the military services are adequately resourcing these strategies and taking appropriate and adequate actions for defending U.S. interests in the Arctic has emerged as a topic of debate and congressional oversight. The Coast Guard has two operational polar icebreakers and has received funding for the procurement of the first of three planned new polar icebreakers. The diminishment of Arctic ice could lead in coming years to increased commercial shipping on two trans-Arctic sea routes—the Northern Sea Route close to Russia, and the Northwest Passage close to Alaska and through the Canadian archipelago—though the rate of increase in the use of these routes might not be as great as sometimes anticipated in press accounts. International guidelines for ships operating in Arctic waters have been recently updated. Changes to the Arctic brought about by warming temperatures will likely allow more exploration for oil, gas, and minerals. Warming that causes permafrost to melt could pose challenges to onshore exploration activities. Increased oil and gas exploration and tourism (cruise ships) in the Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Arctic increase the risk of pollution in the region. Cleaning up oil spills in ice-covered waters will be more difficult than in other areas, primarily because effective strategies for cleaning up oil spills in ice-covered waters have yet to be developed. Large commercial fisheries exist in the Arctic. The United States is working with other countries regarding the management of Arctic fish stocks. Changes in the Arctic could affect threatened and endangered species, and could result in migration of fish stocks to new waters. Under the Endangered Species Act, the polar bear was listed as threatened on May 15, 2008. Arctic climate change is also expected to affect the economies, health, and cultures of Arctic indigenous peoples. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Background ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Definitions of Arctic .................................................................................................................. 1 Arctic Circle Definition ...................................................................................................... 1 Definition in Arctic Research and Policy Act (ARPA) of 1984 .......................................... 2 Other Definitions ................................................................................................................ 2 Population of Arctic .................................................................................................................. 3 Eight Arctic States, Including Five Arctic Coastal States ......................................................... 4 U.S. Identity as an Arctic Nation............................................................................................... 5 U.S. Arctic Research ................................................................................................................. 5 Arctic Research and Policy Act (ARPA) of 1984, As Amended ......................................... 5 FY2021 NSF Budget Request for Arctic Research ............................................................. 6 Major U.S. Policy Documents Relating to Arctic ..................................................................... 9 January 2009 Arctic Policy Directive (NSPD 66/HSPD 25) .............................................. 9 May 2013 National Strategy for Arctic Region ................................................................ 10 January 2014 Implementation Plan for National Strategy for Arctic Region .................... 11 January 2015 Executive Order for Enhancing Coordination of Arctic Efforts ................. 12 December 2017 National Security Strategy Document .................................................... 14 U.S. Special Representative for Arctic (Vacant Since January 2017) ..................................... 14 Arctic Council ......................................................................................................................... 15 Overview ........................................................................................................................... 15 Organization and Operations ............................................................................................ 15 Limits of Arctic Council as a Governing Body ................................................................. 17 Arctic and U.N. Convention on Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) .................................................. 18 Overview of UNCLOS ..................................................................................................... 18 Part VI of UNCLOS and Commission on Limits of Continental Shelf ............................ 19 U.S. Not a Party to UNCLOS ........................................................................................... 19 Potential Alternatives or Supplements to UNCLOS ......................................................... 21 House and Senate Arctic Caucuses ......................................................................................... 22 Issues for Congress ........................................................................................................................ 22 Climate Change and Loss of Arctic Sea Ice ............................................................................ 22 Geopolitical Environment ....................................................................................................... 25 Shift to Era of Renewed Great Power Competition .......................................................... 25 Arctic Governance ............................................................................................................ 31 Relative Priority of Arctic in U.S. Policymaking .............................................................. 32 U.S., Canadian, and Nordic Relations with Russia in Arctic ............................................ 33 NATO and European Union in Arctic ............................................................................... 36 China in Arctic .................................................................................................................. 38 Extended Continental Shelf Submissions, Territorial Disputes, Sovereignty Issues ........ 45 U.S. Military Forces and Operations ....................................................................................... 45 Overview ........................................................................................................................... 45 DOD in General ................................................................................................................ 48 Navy and Coast Guard in General .................................................................................... 50 Navy .................................................................................................................................. 51 Coast Guard ...................................................................................................................... 54 Polar Icebreaking .................................................................................................................... 58 Polar Icebreaker Operations .............................................................................................. 58 Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Current Polar Icebreaker Fleet .......................................................................................... 59 Polar Security Cutter (PSC) Program ............................................................................... 59 Search and Rescue (SAR) ....................................................................................................... 60 Overview ........................................................................................................................... 60 May 2011 Arctic Council Agreement on Arctic SAR ....................................................... 62 Commercial Sea Transportation .............................................................................................. 64 Background ....................................................................................................................... 64 Destination Traffic, Not Trans-Arctic Traffic ................................................................... 65 Unpredictable Ice Conditions Hinder Trans-Arctic Shipping ........................................... 66 Basic Navigation Infrastructure Is Lacking ...................................................................... 67 Regulation of Arctic Shipping .......................................................................................... 68 New Arctic Polar Code ..................................................................................................... 68 Oil, Gas, and Mineral Exploration .......................................................................................... 69 Offshore Oil and Gas Exploration .................................................................................... 69 Extent of the Continental Margin ...................................................................................... 73 Onshore Mineral Development ......................................................................................... 74 Oil Pollution and Pollution Response ..................................................................................... 75 Oil Pollution Implications of Arctic Change ..................................................................... 75 Response and Cleanup Challenges in the Arctic ............................................................... 77 Fisheries .................................................................................................................................. 81 Protected Species .................................................................................................................... 82 Indigenous People Living in Arctic ......................................................................................... 84 Background ....................................................................................................................... 84 Effects of Climate Change ................................................................................................ 86 CRS Reports on Specific Arctic-Related Issues ............................................................................ 88 Figures Figure 1. Arctic Area of Alaska as Defined by ARPA ..................................................................... 3 Figure 2. Entire Arctic Area as Defined by ARPA .......................................................................... 4 Figure 3. Arctic Sea Ice Extent in September 2008, Compared with Prospective Shipping Routes and Oil and Gas Resources............................................................................................. 24 Figure 4. Illustrative Map of Arctic SAR Areas in Arctic SAR Agreement .................................. 64 Tables Table 1. Ship Casualties in Arctic Circle Waters, 2005-2017 ........................................................ 61 Appendixes Appendix A. Arctic Research and Policy Act (ARPA) of 1984 (Title I of P.L. 98-373) ............... 89 Appendix B. P.L. 101-609 of 1990, Amending Arctic Research and Policy Act (ARPA) of 1984 ............................................................................................................................................ 96 Appendix C. January 2009 Arctic Policy Directive (NSPD 66/HSPD 25) ................................... 98 Appendix D. DOD and Coast Guard 2020 Testimony Regarding the Arctic .............................. 106 Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Appendix E. Extended Continental Shelf Submissions, Territorial Disputes, and Sovereignty Issues ..................................................................................................................... 119 Contacts Author Information ...................................................................................................................... 122 Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction The diminishment of Arctic sea ice has led to increased human activities in the Arctic, and has heightened interest in, and concerns about, the region’s future. Issues such as Arctic territorial disputes; commercial shipping through the Arctic; Arctic oil, gas, and mineral exploration; endangered Arctic species; and increased military operations in the Arctic could cause the region in coming years to become an arena of international cooperation, tension, or competition. The United States, by virtue of Alaska, is an Arctic country and has substantial political, economic, energy, environmental, and other interests in the region. Decisions that Congress makes on Arctic-related issues could significantly affect these interests. This report provides an overview of Arctic-related issues for Congress, and refers readers to more in-depth CRS reports on specific Arctic-related issues. Congressional readers with questions about an issue discussed in this report should contact the author or authors of the section discussing that issue. The authors are identified by footnote at the start of each section. This report does not track legislation on specific Arctic-related issues. For tracking of legislative activity, see the CRS reports relating to specific Arctic-related issues that are listed at the end of this report, just prior to Appendix A. Background1 Definitions of Arctic There are multiple definitions of the Arctic that result in differing descriptions of the land and sea areas encompassed by the term. Policy discussions of the Arctic can employ varying definitions of the region, and readers should bear in mind that the definition used in one discussion may differ from that used in another. This CRS report does not rely on any one definition. Arctic Circle Definition The most common and basic definition of the Arctic defines the region as the land and sea area north of the Arctic Circle (a circle of latitude at about 66o 34’ North). For surface locations within this zone, the sun is generally above the horizon for 24 continuous hours at least once per year (at the summer solstice) and below the horizon for 24 continuous hours at least once per year (at the winter solstice). The Arctic Circle definition includes the northernmost third or so of Alaska, as well as the Chukchi Sea, which separates that part of Alaska from Russia, and U.S. territorial and Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) waters north of Alaska. It does not include the lower two-thirds or so of Alaska or the Bering Sea, which separates that lower part of the state from Russia. The area within the Arctic Circle is roughly 8 million square miles, or more than twice the land area of the United States, which is about 3.5 million square miles. 1 Except for the subsection on the Arctic and the U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea, this section was prepared by Ronald O’Rourke, Specialist in Naval Affairs, Foreign Affairs, Defense, and Trade Division. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 2 Definition in Arctic Research and Policy Act (ARPA) of 1984 Section 112 of the Arctic Research and Policy Act (ARPA) of 1984 (Title I of P.L. 98-373 of July 31, 1984)2 defines the Arctic as follows: As used in this title, the term “Arctic” means all United States and foreign territory north of the Arctic Circle and all United States territory north and west of the boundary formed by the Porcupine, Yukon, and Kuskokwim Rivers [in Alaska]; all contiguous seas, including the Arctic Ocean and the Beaufort, Bering, and Chukchi Seas; and the Aleutian chain. This definition, which is codified at 15 U.S.C. 4111,3 includes certain parts of Alaska below the Arctic Circle, including the Aleutian Islands and portions of central and western mainland Alaska, such as the Seward Peninsula and the Yukon Delta. The U.S. Coast Guard states that “The U.S. Arctic encompasses some 2,521 miles of shoreline, an international strait adjacent to the Russian Federation, and 647 miles of land border with Canada above the Arctic Circle. The U.S. Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) in the Arctic contains approximately 889,000 square miles of ocean.”4 Figure 1 below shows the Arctic area of Alaska as defined by ARPA; Figure 2 shows the entire Arctic area as defined by ARPA. Other Definitions Other definitions of the Arctic are based on factors such as average temperature, the northern tree line, the extent of permafrost on land, the extent of sea ice on the ocean, or jurisdictional or administrative boundaries.5 A definition based on a climate-related factor could circumscribe differing areas over time as a result of climate change. The 10o C isotherm definition of the Arctic defines the region as the land and sea area in the northern hemisphere where the average temperature for the warmest month (July) is below 10o Celsius, or 50o Fahrenheit. This definition results in an irregularly shaped Arctic region that excludes some land and sea areas north of the Arctic Circle but includes some land and sea areas south of the Arctic Circle. This definition currently excludes all of Finland and Sweden, as well as some of Alaska above the Arctic Circle, while including virtually all of the Bering Sea and Alaska’s Aleutian Islands.6 The definition of the Arctic adopted by the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP)—a working group of the Arctic Council—“essentially includes the terrestrial and marine areas north of the Arctic Circle (66°32’ N), and north of 62° N in Asia and 60° N in North America, modified to include the marine areas north of the Aleutian chain, Hudson Bay, and parts 2 Title II of P.L. 98-373 is the National Critical Materials Act of 1984. 3 As codified, the definition reads, “As used in this chapter.... ” 4 Coast Guard, Arctic Strategic Outlook, April 2019, p. 11. 5 For discussions and (in some cases) maps, see Susan Joy Hassol, Impacts of a Warming Arctic [Executive Summary]. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2004, p. 4, available at http://amap.no/acia/; Oran R. Yong and Niels Einarsson, Arctic Human Development Report, Stefansson Arctic Institute, Akureyri, Iceland, 2004, pp. 17-18, available at http://www.svs.is/AHDR/AHDR%20chapters/English%20version/Chapters%20PDF.htm; and Hugo Ahlenius, editor in chief et al., Vital Arctic Graphics, People and Global Heritage on Our Last Wild Shores, UNEP/GRID-Arendal, Arendal, Norway, p. 6, available at http://www.grida.no/publications/vg/arctic/. 6 A map showing the line that results from 10o isotherm definition is available at https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/reference_maps/pdf/arctic.pdf. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 3 of the North Atlantic, including the Labrador Sea.” The AMAP website includes a map showing the Arctic Circle, 10o C isotherm, tree line, and AMAP definitions of the Arctic.7 Figure 1. Arctic Area of Alaska as Defined by ARPA Source: U.S. Arctic Research Commission (http://www.arctic.gov/maps/ARPA_Alaska_only_150dpi.jpg, accessed on December 23, 2011). Some observers use the term “high north” as a way of referring to the Arctic. Some observers make a distinction between the “high Arctic”—meaning, in general, the colder portions of the Arctic that are closer to the North Pole—and other areas of the Arctic that are generally less cold and further away from the North Pole, which are sometimes described as the low Arctic or the subarctic. Population of Arctic According to one estimate, about 4 million people, or about 0.05% of the world’s population, live in the Arctic, of which roughly half (roughly 2 million) live in Russia’s part of the Arctic.8 7 See also map posted by the Arctic Council at https://arctic-council.org/images/PDF_attachments/Maps/boundaries.pdf. 8 Sources: National Snow & Ice Data Center, “Arctic People,” accessed October 24, 2018, at https://nsidc.org/cryosphere/arctic-meteorology/arctic-people.html; and United Kingdom, House of Commons, Defence Committee, On Thin Ice: UK Defence in the Arctic, Twelfth Report of Session 2017–19, August 15, 2018 (Ordered by the House of Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 4 Another source, using a broader definition of the Arctic, concluded that just over 10 million people live in the Arctic, including 7 million in Russia’s Arctic.9 Figure 2. Entire Arctic Area as Defined by ARPA Source: U.S. Arctic Research Commission (http://www.arctic.gov/maps/ARPA_Polar_150dpi.jpg, accessed on December 23, 2011). Eight Arctic States, Including Five Arctic Coastal States Eight countries have territory north of the Arctic Circle: the United States (Alaska), Canada, Russia, Norway, Denmark (by virtue of Greenland, a member country of the Kingdom of Denmark), Finland, Sweden, and Iceland. These eight countries are often referred to as the Arctic countries or Arctic States, and they are the member states of the Arctic Council, which is discussed further below. A subset of the eight Arctic countries are the five countries that are considered Arctic coastal states because they have mainland coasts that front onto waters north of the Arctic Circle: the United States, Canada, Russia, Norway, and Denmark (by virtue of Greenland).10 Commons to be printed 19 July 2018), p. 6. 9 Timothy Heleniak, “The Future of Arctic Populations,” Polar Geography, January 3, 2020. 10 The northern coast of mainland Iceland is just south of the Arctic Circle. The Arctic Circle passes through Grimsey Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 5 U.S. Identity as an Arctic Nation As mentioned earlier, the United States, by virtue of Alaska, is an Arctic country and has substantial political, economic, energy, environmental, and other interests in the region. Even so, Alaska is geographically separated and somewhat distant from the other 49 states, and relatively few Americans—fewer than 68,000 as of July 1, 2017—live in the Arctic part of Alaska as shown in Figure 2.11 A March 6, 2020, research paper on the Arctic in U.S. national identity, based on data collected in online surveys conducted in October-December 2019, stated the following: We found that Americans continue to mildly disagree with the assertion that the United States is an Arctic nation with broad and fundamental interests in the region. On a scale from 1 to 7, with higher numbers indicating stronger agreement, Americans’ average rating was 3.40, down slightly from 3.51 in 2017. A plurality of respondents (29%) answered with a score of one, indicating the strongest disagreement. As in previous years, men and older Americans showed greater inclination to agree with the combined assertion of Arctic identity and interests than women or younger respondents. Asking separately about Arctic identity and interests this year revealed stronger disagreement with an Arctic identity, but a slight inclination to agree with the existence of American interests in the region…. We also asked for associations with Alaska and found that while Americans dominantly associate Alaska with cold, snow, and ice, they also associate a greater diversity of other concepts with the state than with the Arctic. In particular, Americans more readily associate animals and wilderness with Alaska than with the Arctic.12 U.S. Arctic Research Arctic Research and Policy Act (ARPA) of 1984, As Amended The Arctic Research and Policy Act (ARPA) of 1984 (Title I of P.L. 98-373 of July 31, 1984)13 “provide[s] for a comprehensive national policy dealing with national research needs and objectives in the Arctic.”14 The act, among other things  made a series of findings concerning the importance of the Arctic and Arctic research;  established the U.S. Arctic Research Commission (USARC) to promote Arctic research and recommend Arctic research policy; Island, a small offshore island of Iceland that is about 25 miles north of the northern coast of mainland Iceland. See “Is Iceland in the Arctic Circle?” Iceland Unlimited, January 2017, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://icelandunlimited.is/blog/is-iceland-in-the-arctic-circle/. 11 Source for figure of fewer than 68,000: CRS analysis of data presented in Table 3.1, entitled Alaska Population by Region, Borough, and Census Area, 2017 to 2045, in Alaska Department of Labor and Workforce Development, Research and Analysis Section, Alaska Population Projections: 2017 to 2045, June 2018, p. 26. The table shows that of Alaska’s estimated population as of July 1, 2017 of 737,080, a total of 589,680, of about 80%, resided in the Anchorage/Matanuska-Susitna region (401,649), the Fairbanks North Star Borough (97,738), the Kenai Peninsula Borough (58,024), and Juneau (32,269). 12 Zachary D. Hamilla, The Arctic in U.S. National Identity (2019), Arctic Studio, March 6, 2020, p. 1. 13 Title II of P.L. 98-373 is the National Critical Materials Act of 1984. 14 These words are taken from the official title of P.L. 98-373. (Arctic Research and Policy Act of 1984 is the short title of Title I of P.L. 98-373.) The remainder of P.L. 98-373’s official title relates to Title II of the act, the short title of which is the National Critical Materials Act of 1984. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 6  designated the National Science Foundation (NSF) as the lead federal agency for implementing Arctic research policy;  established the Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee (IARPC) to develop a national Arctic research policy and a five-year plan to implement that policy, and designated the NSF representative on the IARPC as its chairperson;15 and  defined the term “Arctic” for purposes of the act. The Arctic Research and Policy Act of 1984 was amended by P.L. 101-609 of November 16, 1990. For the texts of the Arctic Research and Policy Act of 1984 and P.L. 101-609, see Appendix A and Appendix B, respectively. FY2021 NSF Budget Request for Arctic Research Office of Polar Programs (OPP) NSF—the lead federal agency for implementing Arctic research policy—carries out Arctic research activities through its Office of Polar Programs (OPP), which operates as part of NSF’s Directorate for Geosciences (GEO). NSF is requesting a total of $419.8 million for OPP for FY2021, a decrease of 14.1% from the $488.7 million actual for FY2019. (Actuals for FY2020 were not available when NSF’s FY2021 budget book was prepared.) Within the $419.8 million requested for OPP for FY2021 is $101.3 million requested for research in both the Arctic and Antarctic, a decrease of 17.7% from the $123.1 million actual for FY2019. Also within the $419.8 million requested for OPP for FY2021 is $40.5 million requested for Arctic research and support logistics, a decrease of 19.2% from the $50.2 million actual for FY2019.16 Regarding its FY2021 budget request for OPP, NSF states that OPP invests in polar scientific research and education as well as provides research support and logistics including infrastructure, such as permanent stations and temporary field camps, in the Antarctic and the Arctic. OPP’s FY 2021 Request is influenced by three key priorities: (1) maintaining strong disciplinary programs that provide the basis for investments in cross-disciplinary system science programs; (2) supporting critical facilities that enable research in the Earth’s polar regions; and (3) supporting the construction phase of the Antarctic Infrastructure Modernization for Science (AIMS) project which was awarded to Leidos Corporation in May 2019. These priorities reflect opportunities for fundamental scientific discovery uniquely accessible in polar regions, as well as studies to investigate the causes and future trajectory of environmental, biological, and human system changes now being observed in the polar regions that have possible global implications. OPP is the primary U.S. supporter of fundamental research in the polar regions. In the Arctic, NSF helps coordinate research planning as directed by the Arctic Research Policy Act of 1984, and the NSF Director chairs the Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee (IARPC) created for this purpose.… In addition to shared cross-directorate basic research objectives, OPP investments will be guided by recent sponsored studies to identify priority areas and ensure effective polar research programs: 15 The IARPC currently includes more than a dozen federal agencies, departments, and offices. Additional information on the IARPC is available at http://www.nsf.gov/od/opp/arctic/iarpc/start.jsp. 16 National Science Foundation, FY 2021 Budget Request to Congress, February 10, 2020, p. OPP-1. The dollar figures in this paragraph have been rounded to the nearest tenth of a million. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 7 • For the Arctic, IARPC’s Arctic Research Plan: FY 2017-2021 and the World Meteorological Organization’s Year of Polar Prediction Implementation Plan 2 inform science investment priorities. Efforts to build an integrated research capacity to address the potential opportunities and challenges of Arctic change for the Nation’s security and economics and well-being of Arctic residents will continue…. Major Investments… • Arctic programs will continue to focus on integrating sustained observations, process studies, theory, and modeling of the natural and social systems to understand and improve predictions of the changing Arctic and its role in the Earth system. This has, in prior years and will in FY 2021, include investments in polar cyberinfrastructure, data analytics, and software. A major FY 2019 investment was made in the Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate (MOSAiC),4 an international study of the formation and melt of sea-ice in the central Arctic Ocean with a year-round field presence that extends into FY 2020. NSF will continue to invest in this effort as the project transitions from field work to analysis of the data generated by the observations. Arctic programs will continue to invest in the Navigating the New Arctic NSF-wide Big Idea that will support research needed to inform the economy, security, and resilience of the Nation, the larger region, and the globe in the face of a rapidly changing Arctic.17 Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) NSF states in the overview of its FY2020 budget request that “in 2021, NSF will continue to invest in its Big Ideas and the Convergence Accelerator, which support bold inquiries into the frontiers of science and engineering. These efforts endeavor to break down the silos of conventional scientific research funded by NSF to embrace the cross-disciplinary and dynamic nature of the science of the future. The Big Ideas represent unique opportunities for the U.S. to define and push the frontiers of global science and engineering leadership and to invest in fundamental research. This research will advance the Nation’s economic competitiveness, security, and prestige on the global stage. For more information, see the NSF-Wide Investments chapter.”18 Among the six research Big Ideas, NSF states in its overview that number four is Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) ($30.0 million): Establishing an observing network of mobile and fixed platforms and tools, including cyber tools, across the Arctic to document and understand the Arctic’s rapid biological, physical, chemical, and social changes, in partnership with other agencies, countries, and native populations.19 NSF’s is requesting $40.8 million for NNA for FY2021, including $30.0 million (noted above) for stewardship activities and $10.8 million for foundational activities.20 NSF’s discussion of NNA states: Overview Arctic temperatures are rising faster than nearly everywhere else on Earth. The rapid and wide-scale changes occurring in response to this warming portend new opportunities and risks to natural systems; social and cultural systems; economic, political, and legal systems; and infrastructure and other engineered systems of the Arctic and across the globe. Gaps in scientific observations and the prevalence of interdependent social, natural, and built 17 National Science Foundation, FY 2021 Budget Request to Congress, February 10, 2020, pp. OPP-1 to OPP-2. 18 National Science Foundation, FY 2021 Budget Request to Congress, February 10, 2020, p. Overview-9. 19 National Science Foundation, FY 2021 Budget Request to Congress, February 10, 2020, p. Overview-9. Emphasis as in original. 20 National Science Foundation, FY 2021 Budget Request to Congress, February 10, 2020, p. NSF-Wide Investments-11. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 8 systems in the Arctic make it challenging to predict the region’s future. Understanding and adapting to a changing Arctic will require creative new directions for Arctic-specific research, education, workforce development, and leveraging of science, engineering, and technology advances from outside the Arctic. NNA, one of NSF’s Big Ideas, embodies the Foundation’s forward-looking response to these profound challenges. NNA seeks innovations in Arctic observational networks and fundamental convergence research across engineering and the social, natural, environmental, and computing and information sciences, that address the interactions or connections between natural and built environments and social systems and how these connections inform our understanding of Arctic change and its local and global effects. NNA empowers new research communities; diversifies the next generation of Arctic researchers; integrates the co-production of knowledge with local and Indigenous people and organizations; and engages with interdisciplinary, interagency, and international partners to further pan-Arctic and Arctic-global perspectives. With respect to observational research, NNA will address key gaps in the existing array of observation, communication, computation and data systems. Strong coupling of observation, communication, and computation and data, including the theoretical foundations underlying these, will be supported to ensure progress. NNA will leverage resources with the Mid-scale RI and HDR Big Ideas as appropriate. NNA also strongly encourages projects with components that advance STEM education; that deepen public understanding of the changing Arctic to benefit both citizens and policy makers; and that advance workforce-development objectives. NNA will build on NSF’s STEM investments and the NSF INCLUDES Big Idea to encourage innovative and appropriately evaluated education and public engagement efforts that leverage exciting NNA science and inspire diverse participation in STEM. By drawing upon expertise from across the agency, NNA investments will accelerate research needed to inform decisions regarding the national security, economic development, and societal well-being of the U.S. as an Arctic nation and enable resilient, sustainable Arctic communities. NSF plans to invest in NNA through FY 2023. Goals 1. Improved understanding of Arctic change and its local and global effects that capitalizes on: innovative and optimized observation infrastructure; advances in understanding of fundamental processes; and new approaches to modeling interactions among the natural environment, built environment, and social systems. 2. New and enhanced research communities that are diverse, integrative, and well-positioned to carry out productive research on the interactions or connections between Arctic natural and built environments and social systems and how these connections inform our understanding of Arctic change and its local and global effects. 3. Research outcomes that inform U.S. national security, economic development, and societal well-being and enable resilient, sustainable Arctic communities. 4. Enhanced efforts in formal and informal education that focus on the multi-scale impacts of Arctic change on natural and built environments and social systems and broadly disseminate research outcomes. In FY 2017, NSF issued a Dear Colleague letter (DCL) on the Growing Convergence Research Big Idea (NSF 17-065)1 to explore convergence approaches within four of the research-focused NSF Big Ideas, including NNA. This DCL requested proposals for Research Coordination Networks (RCNs), workshops, and activities to enhance Arctic observational systems. In FY 2018, NSF issued a DCL on Stimulating Research Related to NNA (NSF 18-048),2 requesting research proposals building on the FY 2017 awards, as well as proposals for workshops and RCNs. NSF awarded 25 new projects under these two Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 9 DCLs and related opportunities with budgets ranging from $50,000 to $1.50 million lasting up to 60 months. In FY 2019, NSF issued a solicitation for NNA (NSF 19-511)3 and made 13 awards to support research projects, and eight awards to support planning projects that will develop convergence research teams, with budgets ranging from $13,000 to $3.0 million lasting up to 60 months. FY 2021 Investments NSF’s NNA activities in FY 2021 will focus on enabling advances in priority areas, which will be developed by building on outcomes from FY 2017 to FY 2020 activities. In FY 2020, NNA is focusing on convergent social/built/natural environment systems science; advances in observation, communication, and computation and data systems; and community-coordination activities. In FY 2021, NSF will continue support for NNA, and expects to issue another solicitation. NSF will continue to coordinate and leverage NNA-related activities with external stakeholders, including: • other federal agencies through the Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee chaired by the NSF Director; • local residents and indigenous peoples through state and local governance structures of Alaska; and • international partners through fora such as the biannual International Arctic Science Ministerial. The portfolio of FY 2021 NNA activities will support the goals listed above.21 Major U.S. Policy Documents Relating to Arctic January 2009 Arctic Policy Directive (NSPD 66/HSPD 25) On January 12, 2009 (i.e., eight days before its final day in office), the George W. Bush Administration released a presidential directive establishing a new U.S. policy for the Arctic region. The directive, dated January 9, 2009, was issued as National Security Presidential Directive 66/Homeland Security Presidential Directive 25 (NSPD 66/HSPD 25). The directive was the result of an interagency review, and it superseded for the Arctic (but not the Antarctic) a 1994 presidential directive on Arctic and Antarctic policy. The directive, among other things  states that the United States is an Arctic nation, with varied and compelling interests in the region;  sets forth a six-element overall U.S. policy for the region;  describes U.S. national security and homeland security interests in the Arctic; and  discusses a number of issues as they relate to the Arctic, including international governance; the extended continental shelf and boundary issues; promotion of international scientific cooperation; maritime transportation; economic issues, including energy; and environmental protection and conservation of natural resources. For the text of NSPD 66/HSPD 25, see Appendix C. 21 National Science Foundation, FY 2021 Budget Request to Congress, February 10, 2020, pp. NSF-Wide Investments–11 to NSF-Wide Investments–12. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 10 May 2013 National Strategy for Arctic Region On May 10, 2013, the Obama Administration released a document entitled National Strategy for the Arctic Region.22 The document appears to supplement rather than supersede the January 2009 Arctic policy directive (NSPD 66/HSPD 25) discussed above.23 The executive summary of National Strategy for the Arctic Region begins by quoting the above statement from the previous May 2010 national security strategy document, and then states the following: The National Strategy for the Arctic Region sets forth the United States Government’s strategic priorities for the Arctic region. This strategy is intended to position the United States to respond effectively to challenges and emerging opportunities arising from significant increases in Arctic activity due to the diminishment of sea ice and the emergence of a new Arctic environment. It defines U.S. national security interests in the Arctic region and identifies prioritized lines of effort, building upon existing initiatives by Federal, state, local, and tribal authorities, the private sector, and international partners, and aims to focus efforts where opportunities exist and action is needed. It is designed to meet the reality of a changing Arctic environment, while we simultaneously pursue our global objective of combating the climatic changes that are driving these environmental conditions. Our strategy is built on three lines of effort: 1. Advance United States Security Interests – We will enable our vessels and aircraft to operate, consistent with international law, through, under, and over the airspace and waters of the Arctic, support lawful commerce, achieve a greater awareness of activity in the region, and intelligently evolve our Arctic infrastructure and capabilities, including ice-capable platforms as needed. U.S. security in the Arctic encompasses a broad spectrum of activities, ranging from those supporting safe commercial and scientific operations to national defense. 2. Pursue Responsible Arctic Region Stewardship – We will continue to protect the Arctic environment and conserve its resources; establish and institutionalize an integrated Arctic management framework; chart the Arctic region; and employ scientific research and traditional knowledge to increase understanding of the Arctic. 3. Strengthen International Cooperation – Working through bilateral relationships and multilateral bodies, including the Arctic Council, we will pursue arrangements that advance collective interests, promote shared Arctic state prosperity, protect the Arctic environment, and enhance regional security, and we will work toward U.S. accession to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (Law of the Sea Convention). Our approach will be informed by the following guiding principles: • Safeguard Peace and Stability – Seek to maintain and preserve the Arctic region as an area free of conflict, acting in concert with allies, partners, and other interested parties. Support and preserve: international legal principles of freedom of navigation and overflight and other uses of the sea and airspace related to these freedoms, unimpeded lawful commerce, and the peaceful resolution of disputes for all nations. 22 National Strategy for the Arctic Region, May 2013, 11 pp.; accessed May 14, 2013, at https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/docs/nat_arctic_strategy.pdf. The document includes a cover letter from President Obama dated May 10, 2013. 23 National Strategy for the Arctic Region states on page 6 that the “lines of effort” it describes are to be undertaken “[t]o meet the challenges and opportunities in the Arctic region, and in furtherance of established Arctic Region Policy,” at which point there is a footnote referencing the January 2009 Arctic policy directive. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 11 • Make Decisions Using the Best Available Information – Across all lines of effort, decisions need to be based on the most current science and traditional knowledge.24 • Pursue Innovative Arrangements – Foster partnerships with the state of Alaska, Arctic states, other international partners, and the private sector to more efficiently develop, resource, and manage capabilities, where appropriate and feasible, to better advance our strategic priorities in this austere fiscal environment. • Consult and Coordinate with Alaska Natives – Engage in a consultation process with Alaska Natives, recognizing tribal governments’ unique legal relationship with the United States and providing for meaningful and timely opportunity to inform Federal policy affecting Alaskan Native communities.25 January 2014 Implementation Plan for National Strategy for Arctic Region On January 30, 2014, the Obama Administration released an implementation plan for the May 2013 national strategy for the Arctic region.26 The plan states that it complements and builds upon existing initiatives by Federal, State, local, and tribal authorities, the private sector, and international partners, and focuses efforts where opportunities exist and action is most needed. The Implementation Plan reflects the reality of a changing Arctic environment and upholds national interests in safety, security, and environmental protection, and works with international partners to pursue global objectives of addressing climatic changes. This Implementation Plan follows the structure and objectives of the Strategy’s three lines of effort and is consistent with the guiding principles. The lines of effort of the Strategy and the Implementation Plan are as follows: • Advance United States Security Interests • Pursue Responsible Arctic Region Stewardship • Strengthen International Cooperation These lines of effort and guiding principles are meant to be implemented as a coherent whole.27 The plan also states the following: Climate change is already affecting the entire global population, and Alaska residents are experiencing the impacts in the Arctic. To ensure a cohesive Federal approach, implementation activities must be aligned with the Executive Order on Preparing the United States for the Impacts of Climate Change28 while executing the Strategy. In addition 24 A footnote in the document at this point states the following: “Traditional knowledge refers to a body of evolving practical knowledge based on observations and personal experience of indigenous communities over an extensive, multigenerational time period.” (BOEM Ocean Science, Vol. 9, Issue 2, May/April/June 2012, page 4). 25 National Strategy for the Arctic Region, May 2013, pp. 2-3. 26 Implementation Plan for The National Strategy for the Arctic Region, January 2014, 32 pp. The news release announcing the implementation plan is posted at http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2014/01/30/white-house-releases-implementation-plan-national-strategy-arctic-region. The document itself is posted at https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/docs/implementation_plan_for_the_national_strategy_for_the_arctic_region_-_fi....pdf. 27 Implementation Plan for The National Strategy for the Arctic Region, January 2014, p. 1. 28 The passage contains a footnote at this point stating that this executive order was signed by the President on November 1, 2013. It is Executive Order 13653. The text of the order is posted at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2013-11-06/pdf/2013-26785.pdf and http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/11/01/executive-order-preparing-united-states-impacts-climate-change. A fact sheet about it is posted at http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/11/01/fact-sheet-executive-order-climate-preparedness. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 12 to the guiding principles, the following approaches are important in implementing the activities across all of the lines of effort: • Foster Partnerships with Arctic Stakeholders. As outlined in the Strategy, all lines of effort must involve Arctic partners, particularly the State of Alaska and Alaska Natives in the Arctic region. Federal agencies, the State of Alaska, tribal communities, local governments, and academia will work with other nations, industry stakeholders, non-governmental organizations, and research partners to address emerging challenges and opportunities in the Arctic environment. The Federal Government should strive to maintain the free flow of communication and cooperation with the State of Alaska to support national priorities. • Coordinate and Integrate Activities across the Federal Government. Multiple Federal bodies currently have authority for Arctic policy (e.g., the National Ocean Council (NOC), Arctic Policy Group, and Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee (IARPC)). The National Security Council Staff will develop an Executive Order through the interagency process to maximize efficiency, align interagency initiatives, and create unity of effort among all Federal entities conducting activities in the Arctic.29 The plan outlines about 36 specific initiatives. For each, it presents a brief statement of the objective, a list of next steps to be taken, a brief statement about measuring progress in achieving the objective, and the names of the lead and supporting federal agencies to be involved. On March 9, 2016, the Obama Administration released three documents discussing the implementation of the national strategy for the Arctic:30 (1) a report entitled 2015 Year in Review—Progress Report on the Implementation of the National Strategy for the Arctic Region;31 (2) an appendix to that report entitled Appendix A, Implementation Framework for the National Strategy for the Arctic Region:32 and (3) another appendix to that report entitled Appendix B, Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee 5-Year Plan Collaboration Teams: 2015 Summary of Accomplishments and 2016 Priorities.33 January 2015 Executive Order for Enhancing Coordination of Arctic Efforts On January 21, 2015, then-President Obama issued Executive Order 13689, entitled “Enhancing Coordination of National Efforts in the Arctic.” The order states the following in part: 29 Implementation Plan for The National Strategy for the Arctic Region, January 2014, p. 4. 30 For the text of the Obama Administration’s announcement releasing these documents, see “Advancing Implementation of the National Strategy for the Arctic Region,” March 9, 2016, accessed March 25, 2016, at https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2016/03/09/advancing-implementation-national-strategy-arctic-region. 31 2015 Year in Review—Progress Report on the Implementation of the National Strategy for the Arctic Region, Prepared by the Arctic Executive Steering Committee, March 2016, 35 pp., accessed March 25, 2016, at https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/documents/Progress%20Report%20on%20the%20Implementation%20of%20the%20National%20Strategy%20for%20the%20Arctic%20Region.pdf. 32 Appendix A, Implementation Framework for the National Strategy for the Arctic Region, March 2016, 33 pp., accessed March 25, 2016, at https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/documents/National%20Strategy%20for%20the%20Arctic%20Region%20Implementation%20Framework%20%28Appendix%20A%29%20Final.pdf. 33 Appendix B, Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee 5-Year Plan Collaboration Teams: 2015 Summary of Accomplishments and 2016 Priorities, undated, 13 pp., accessed March 25, 2016, at https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/documents/Appendix%20B%20IARPC%202015%20Annual%20Report.pdf. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 13 As the United States assumes the Chairmanship of the Arctic Council, it is more important than ever that we have a coordinated national effort that takes advantage of our combined expertise and efforts in the Arctic region to promote our shared values and priorities. As the Arctic has changed, the number of Federal working groups created to address the growing strategic importance and accessibility of this critical region has increased. Although these groups have made significant progress and achieved important milestones, managing the broad range of interagency activity in the Arctic requires coordinated planning by the Federal Government, with input by partners and stakeholders, to facilitate Federal, State, local, and Alaska Native tribal government and similar Alaska Native organization, as well as private and nonprofit sector, efforts in the Arctic.... There is established an Arctic Executive Steering Committee (Steering Committee), which shall provide guidance to executive departments and agencies (agencies) and enhance coordination of Federal Arctic policies across agencies and offices, and, where applicable, with State, local, and Alaska Native tribal governments and similar Alaska Native organizations, academic and research institutions, and the private and nonprofit sectors.... ... the Steering Committee will meet quarterly, or as appropriate, to shape priorities, establish strategic direction, oversee implementation, and ensure coordination of Federal activities in the Arctic.... The Steering Committee, in coordination with the heads of relevant agencies and under the direction of the Chair, shall: (a) provide guidance and coordinate efforts to implement the priorities, objectives, activities, and responsibilities identified in National Security Presidential Directive 66/Homeland Security Presidential Directive 25, Arctic Region Policy, the National Strategy for the Arctic Region and its Implementation Plan, and related agency plans; (b) provide guidance on prioritizing Federal activities, consistent with agency authorities, while the United States is Chair of the Arctic Council, including, where appropriate, recommendations for resources to use in carrying out those activities; and (c) establish a working group to provide a report to the Steering Committee by May 1, 2015, that: (i) identifies potential areas of overlap between and within agencies with respect to implementation of Arctic policy and strategic priorities and provides recommendations to increase coordination and reduce any duplication of effort, which may include ways to increase the effectiveness of existing groups; and (ii) provides recommendations to address any potential gaps in implementation.... It is in the best interest of the Nation for the Federal Government to maximize transparency and promote collaboration where possible with the State of Alaska, Alaska Native tribal governments and similar Alaska Native organizations, and local, private-sector, and nonprofit-sector stakeholders. To facilitate consultation and partnerships with the State of Alaska and Alaska Native tribal governments and similar Alaska Native organizations, the Steering Committee shall: (a) develop a process to improve coordination and the sharing of information and knowledge among Federal, State, local, and Alaska Native tribal governments and similar Alaska Native organizations, and private-sector and nonprofit-sector groups on Arctic issues; (b) establish a process to ensure tribal consultation and collaboration, consistent with my memorandum of November 5, 2009 (Tribal Consultation). This process shall ensure meaningful consultation and collaboration with Alaska Native tribal governments and similar Alaska Native organizations in the development of Federal policies that have Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 14 Alaska Native implications, as applicable, and provide feedback and recommendations to the Steering Committee; (c) identify an appropriate Federal entity to be the point of contact for Arctic matters with the State of Alaska and with Alaska Native tribal governments and similar Alaska Native organizations to support collaboration and communication; and (d) invite members of State, local, and Alaska Native tribal governments and similar Alaska Native organizations, and academic and research institutions to consult on issues or participate in discussions, as appropriate and consistent with applicable law.34 As stated in the above-quoted passage, Executive Order 13689, among other things, established an Arctic Executive Steering Committee (AESC) to “provide guidance to executive departments and agencies (agencies) and enhance coordination of Federal Arctic policies across agencies and offices, and, where applicable, with State, local, and Alaska Native tribal governments and similar Alaska Native organizations, academic and research institutions, and the private and nonprofit sectors.” Regarding the AESC, a February 28, 2019, press report states the following: “Although the [executive] order has not been rescinded, the Trump administration has left the committee dormant for the past two years.”35 December 2017 National Security Strategy Document The National Security Strategy document released by the Trump Administration in December 2017 mentions the term Arctic once, stating that that “A range of international institutions establishes the rules for how states, businesses, and individuals interact with each other, across land and sea, the Arctic, outer space, and the digital realm. It is vital to U.S. prosperity and security that these institutions uphold the rules that help keep these common domains open and free.”36 U.S. Special Representative for Arctic (Vacant Since January 2017) On July 16, 2014, during the Obama Administration, then-Secretary of State John Kerry announced the appointment of retired Coast Guard Admiral Robert J. Papp Jr., who served as Commandant of the Coast Guard from May 2010 to May 2014, as the first U.S. Special Representative for the Arctic.37 Under the Obama Administration, the duties of this position involved, among other things, interacting with ambassadors to the Arctic region from other countries. Papp served as the U.S. Special Representative until January 20, 2017, the final day of the Obama Administration and the first day of the Trump Administration; the position has been unfilled since then. 34 Executive order, “Enhancing Coordination of National Efforts in the Arctic,” January 21, 2015, accessed January 21, 2015, at http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/01/21/executive-order-enhancing-coordination-national-efforts-arctic. 35 Melody Schreiber, “Two U.S. Bills Could Advance American Presence in the Arctic,” Arctic Today, February 28, 2019. 36 National Security Strategy of the United States of America, December 2017, p. 40. 37 See “Retired Admiral Robert Papp to Serve as U.S. Special Representative for the Arctic,” Press Statement, John Kerry, Secretary of State, Washington, DC, July 16, 2014, accessed July 17, 2014, at http://www.state.gov/secretary/remarks/2014/07/229317.htm. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 15 Arctic Council Overview The Arctic Council is the leading international forum for addressing issues relating to the Arctic. It was created in September 1996, following a series of meetings initiated by Finland in 1989.38 Its founding document is the Ottawa Declaration of September 19, 1996, a joint declaration (not a treaty) signed by representatives of the eight Arctic states. The declaration states that the council “is established as a high level forum to,” among other things, “provide a means for promoting cooperation, coordination and interaction among the Arctic States, with the involvement of the Arctic indigenous communities and other Arctic inhabitants on common Arctic issues, in particular issues of sustainable development and environmental protection in the Arctic….”39 The council describes itself on its website as “the leading intergovernmental forum promoting cooperation, coordination and interaction among the Arctic States, Arctic indigenous communities and other Arctic inhabitants on common Arctic issues, in particular on issues of sustainable development and environmental protection in the Arctic.”40 The State Department describes the council as “the preeminent intergovernmental forum for addressing issues related to the Arctic Region…. The Arctic Council is not a treaty-based international organization but rather an international forum that operates on the basis of consensus, echoing the peaceful and cooperative nature of the Arctic Region.41 Thematic areas of work addressed by the council include environment and climate, biodiversity, oceans, Arctic peoples, and agreements on Arctic scientific cooperation, cooperation on marine oil pollution preparedness and response in the Arctic, and cooperation on aeronautical and maritime search and rescue in the Arctic.42 The Ottawa Declaration states explicitly that “The Arctic Council should not deal with matters related to military security.” Organization and Operations Eight Member States and Their Senior Arctic Officials (SAOs) The Arctic Council’s membership consists of the eight Arctic states. Each member state is represented by a Senior Arctic Official (SAO), who is usually drawn from that country’s foreign ministry. The SAOs meet at least twice per year.43 38 See Arctic Council, “Finland,” updated September 10, 2015, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us/member-states/finland. The council states that “The establishment of the Arctic Council was preceded by the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy (June 1991), a declaration on the protection of the Arctic environment.” (Arctic Council, “Frequently Asked Questions,” updated June 6, 2018, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us/arctic-council/faq.) 39 Arctic Council, “Ottawa Declaration (1996),” accessed July 30, 2019, at https://oaarchive.arctic-council.org/handle/11374/85. 40 Arctic Council, “The Arctic Council: A Backgrounder,” updated September 13, 2018, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us. 41 State Department, “Arctic Region,” undated, accessed July 31, 2019, at https://www.state.gov/key-topics-office-of-ocean-and-polar-affairs/arctic/. 42 Arctic Council, “Thematic Work,” undated, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/our-work. 43 Arctic Council, “Frequently Asked Questions,” updated June 6, 2018, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us/arctic-council/faq. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 16 Indigenous Permanent Participants In addition to the council’s eight member states, “six organizations representing Arctic indigenous peoples have status as Permanent Participants. The category of Permanent Participant was created to provide for active participation and full consultation with the Arctic indigenous peoples within the Council. They include: the Aleut International Association, the Arctic Athabaskan Council, Gwich’in Council International, the Inuit Circumpolar Council, Russian Association of Indigenous Peoples of the North and the Saami Council.”44 Observers Thirteen non-Arctic states have been approved as observers to the council: Germany, the Netherlands, Poland, and the United Kingdom (approved in 1998); France (2000); Spain (2006); China, India, Italy, Japan, Singapore, and South Korea (2013); and Switzerland (2017). A November 22, 2019, press report states that “in 2015, uncertainty about their role led to a hiatus in observers being admitted.”45 Estonia has announced it will apply to be admitted as an observer in 2021.46 In addition to state observers, 14 intergovernmental and interparliamentary organizations and 12 nongovernmental organizations have been approved as observers, making for a total of 39 observer states and organizations.47 The most recently added observer was the International Maritime Organization (IMO), which was added to the list of intergovernmental and interparliamentary observer organizations in 2019. Working Groups The council’s work is carried out primarily in six working groups that focus on Arctic contaminants; Arctic monitoring and assessment; conservation of Arctic flora and fauna; emergency prevention, preparedness and response; protection of the Arctic marine environment; and sustainable development.48 The council may also establish task forces or expert groups for specific projects. Secretariat The council’s standing Secretariat formally became operational in June 2013 in Tromsø, Norway.49 44 Arctic Council, “The Arctic Council: A Backgrounder,” updated September 13, 2018, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us. The council states further that “Out of a total of 4 million inhabitants of the Arctic, approximately 500,000 belong to indigenous peoples. Indigenous peoples’ organizations have been granted Permanent Participants status in the Arctic Council. The Permanent Participants have full consultation rights in connection with the Council’s negotiations and decisions. The Permanent Participants represent a unique feature of the Arctic Council, and they make valuable contributions to its activities in all areas.” (Arctic Council, “Permanent Participants,” updated March 22, 2017, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us/permanent-participants.) 45 Kevin McGwin, “Iceland Begins Its Arctic Council Chairmanship with a Focus on Observers,” Arctic Today, November 22, 2019. 46 Kevin McGwin, “Estonia Is Applying to Become an Arctic Council Observer,” Arctic Today, November 20, 2019. 47 Arctic Council, “Observers,” updated May 23, 2019, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us/arctic-council/observers. 48 For more on the working groups, see Arctic Council, “Working Groups,” updated September 10, 2015, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us/working-groups. 49 For more on the Secretariat, see Arctic Council, “The Arctic Council Secretariat,” updated November 4, 2016, Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 17 Chairmanship The council has a two-year chairmanship that rotates among the eight member states. The United States held the chairmanship from April 24, 2015, to May 11, 2017, a period which began during the Obama Administration and continued into the first 16 weeks of the Trump Administration.50 The United States had previously held the chairmanship from 1998 to 2000, and will next hold it in 2031-2033.51 On May 11, 2017, the chairmanship was transferred from the United States to Finland. On May 7, 2019, it was transferred from Finland to Iceland, which will hold the position until May 2021.52 Decisionmaking The council states that “All decisions of the Arctic Council and its subsidiary bodies are by consensus of the eight Arctic Member States.”53 More specifically, the council states that “Decisions at all levels in the Arctic Council are the exclusive right and responsibility of the eight Arctic States with the involvement of the Permanent Participants,”54 and that “Arctic Council assessments and recommendations are the result of analysis and efforts undertaken by the Working Groups. Decisions of the Arctic Council are taken by consensus among the eight Arctic Council States, with full consultation and involvement of the Permanent Participants.”55 Limits of Arctic Council as a Governing Body Regarding the limits of the Arctic Council as a governing body, the council states that accessed July 30, 2019, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us/arctic-council/the-arctic-council-secretariat. 50 See, for example, Yereth Rosen, “US Ends Arctic Council Chairmanship With Reluctance on Climate Action,” Alaska Dispatch News, May 11, 2017. 51 During the Obama Administration’s portion of the period of U.S. chairmanship, the U.S. chairmanship team was led by then-Secretary of State John Kerry. The State Department during the Obama Administration listed nine additional members of the team, including retired Coast Guard Admiral Robert J. Papp Jr., U.S. Special Representative for the Arctic. (“Meet the U.S. Chairmanship Team,” accessed September 29, 2015, at http://www.arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us/arctic-council/u-s-chairmanship.) The other eight members of the team were the Honorable Fran Ulmer, Special Advisor to the U.S. Secretary of State on Arctic Science and Policy; Ambassador David Balton, Chair of the Senior Arctic Officials; Julia Gourley, U.S. Senior Arctic Official (SAO); Dr. Nikoosh Carlo, Senior Advisor to the SAO Chair; Dr. Adrianna Muir, Deputy Senior Arctic Official; Nomi Seltzer, Arctic Affairs Advisor; Erin Robertson, Arctic Press and Public Affairs Officer; and Matthew Kastrinsky, Administrative Officer. 52 See Arctic Council, “Arctic Council Ministers meet, pass Chairmanship from Finland to Iceland, Arctic States conclude Arctic Council Ministerial meeting by signing a joint statement,” May 7, 2019, updated June 28, 2019, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/our-work2/8-news-and-events/521-arctic-council-ministers-meet-pass-chairmanship-from-finland-to-iceland. The council states that “The theme of the Arctic Council Chairmanship program for [the Iceland chairmanship period of] 2019-2021 reflects Iceland’s commitment to the principle of sustainable development and refers to the necessity of close cooperation between the states and peoples of the region and beyond. With sustainable development as an overarching theme, Iceland will highlight four priorities: The Arctic Marine Environment, Climate and Green Energy Solutions, People and Communities of the Arctic, and a Stronger Arctic Council.” (Arctic Council, “Iceland’s Chairmanship 2019-2021,” undated, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us/arctic-council/iceland-chairmanship.) 53 Arctic Council, “Working Groups,” updated September 10, 2015, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us/working-groups. 54 Arctic Council, “Observers,” updated May 23, 2019, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us/arctic-council/observers. 55 Arctic Council, “The Arctic Council: A Backgrounder,” updated September 13, 2018, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 18 The Arctic Council is a forum; it has no programming budget. All projects or initiatives are sponsored by one or more Arctic States. Some projects also receive support from other entities. The Arctic Council does not and cannot implement or enforce its guidelines, assessments or recommendations. That responsibility belongs to each individual Arctic State. The Arctic Council’s mandate, as articulated in the Ottawa Declaration, explicitly excludes military security.56 Arctic and U.N. Convention on Law of the Sea (UNCLOS)57 Overview of UNCLOS The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) “lays down a comprehensive regime of law and order in the world’s oceans and seas[,] establishing rules governing all uses of the oceans and their resources.”58 It builds on four 1958 law of the sea conventions to which the United States, following Senate consent to ratification, became a party in 1961, and which entered force between 1962 and 1966.59 All four treaties remain in force for the United States.60 UNCLOS was adopted in 1982 as the “culmination of more than 14 years of work involving participation by more than 150 countries representing all regions of the world, all legal and political systems and the spectrum of socio/economic development.”61 The treaty was modified in 1994 by an agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of the treaty, which relates to the seabed and ocean floor and subsoil thereof that are beyond the limits of national jurisdiction. UNCLOS entered into force in November 1994. As of April 8, 2019, 168 nations were party to the treaty.62 As discussed later in more detail, the United States is not a party to the treaty. 56 Arctic Council, “The Arctic Council: A Backgrounder,” updated September 13, 2018, accessed July 30, 2019, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us. 57 Parts of this section were prepared by Marjorie Ann Browne, who was a Specialist in International Relations, Foreign Affairs, Defense, and Trade Division until her retirement from CRS on October 10, 2015. 58 United Nations, “United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982, Overview and full text,” updated June 28, 2019, accessed August 2, 2019, at https://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_agreements/convention_overview_convention.htm. 59 These are the Convention on the Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone, which entered into force on September 10, 1964, the Convention on the Continental Shelf, which entered into force on 10 June 10, 1964, the Convention on the High Seas, which entered into force on September 30, 1962, and the Convention on Fishing and Conservation of Living Resources of the High Seas, which entered into force on March 20, 1966. The four 1958 treaties resulted from the first Conference on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS I), which took place in 1958. (For additional discussion, see United Nations, “United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea,” undated, accessed August 2, 2019, at http://legal.un.org/diplomaticconferences/1958_los/, and United Nations, “1958 Geneva Conventions on the Law of the Sea,” undated, accessed August 2, 2019, at http://legal.un.org/avl/ha/gclos/gclos.html.) 60 See Department of State, Treaties in Force, Section 2, Multilateral Treaties in Force as of January 1, 2019, pp. 526, 501, 525, and 516, respectively. 61 United Nations, “United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982, Overview and full text,” updated June 28, 2019, accessed August 2, 2019, at https://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_agreements/convention_overview_convention.htm. More specifically, the treaty resulted from the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS III), which took place between 1973 and 1982. For additional discussion, see United Nations, “Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea,” undated, accessed August 2, 2019, at http://legal.un.org/diplomaticconferences/1973_los/. 62 Chronological lists of ratifications of, accessions and successions to the Convention and the related Agreements as of February 3, 2017, accessed December 13, 2018, at http://www.un.org/Depts/los/reference_files/chronological_lists_of_ratifications.htm#. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 19 Part VI of UNCLOS and Commission on Limits of Continental Shelf Part VI of UNCLOS (consisting of Articles 76 through 85), which covers the continental shelf, and Annex II to the treaty, which established a Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, are particularly pertinent to the Arctic, because Article 77 states that “The coastal State exercises over the continental shelf sovereign rights for the purpose of exploring it and exploiting its natural resources,” and that these natural resources include, among other things, “mineral and other non-living resources of the seabed and subsoil,” including oil and gas deposits.63 Article 76 states that “The continental shelf of a coastal State comprises the seabed and subsoil of the submarine areas that extend beyond its territorial sea throughout the natural prolongation of its land territory to the outer edge of the continental margin, or to a distance of 200 nautical miles” if the outer edge of the continental margin does not extend up to that distance. Article 76 states that “the coastal State shall establish the outer edge of the continental margin wherever the margin extends beyond 200 nautical miles,” and that “Information on the limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles... shall be submitted by the coastal State to the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf set up under Annex II.... The Commission shall make recommendations to coastal States on matters related to the establishment of the outer limits of their continental shelf. The limits of the shelf established by a coastal State on the basis of these recommendations shall be final and binding.” Under Annex II, the commission reviews the information submitted by a coastal state and, by a two-thirds majority, approves its recommendations to the submitting state. If the submitting state disagrees with the commission’s recommendations, it “shall, within a reasonable time, make a revised or new submission to the Commission.” (For information on extended continental shelf submissions to the Commission, see Appendix E.) U.S. Not a Party to UNCLOS As noted earlier, the United States is not a party to UNCLOS.64 Although the United States is not a party to UNCLOS, the United States accepts and acts in accordance with the non-seabed mining provisions of the treaty, such as those relating to navigation and overflight, which the United States views as reflecting customary international law of the sea.65 The United States did not sign UNCLOS when it was adopted in 1982 because the United States objected to the seabed mining provisions of Part XI of the treaty. Certain other countries also expressed concerns about these provisions.66 The United Nations states that “To address certain 63 Other parts of UNCLOS relevant to the Arctic include those relating to navigation and high-seas freedoms, fisheries, and exclusive economic zones. 64 The United States is not a signatory to the treaty. On July 29, 1994, the United States became a signatory to the 1994 agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of the treaty. The United States has not ratified either the treaty or the 1994 agreement. 65 In a March 10, 1983, statement on U.S. oceans policy, President Reagan stated, President Reagan stated that “the United States is prepared to accept and act in accordance with the [treaty’s] balance of interests relating to traditional uses of the oceans—such as navigation and overflight. In this respect, the United States will recognize the rights of other states in the waters off their coasts, as reflected in the Convention, so long as the rights and freedoms of the United States and others under international law are recognized by such coastal states.” (Ronald Reagan Presidential Library & Museum, “Statement on United States Oceans Policy,” undated, accessed August 2, 2019, at https://www.reaganlibrary.gov/research/speeches/31083c.) 66 In a March 10, 1983, statement on U.S. oceans policy, President Reagan stated, “Last July, I announced that the United States will not sign the United Nations Law of the Sea Convention that was opened for signature on December 10. We have taken this step because several major problems in the Convention’s deep seabed mining provisions are Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 20 difficulties with the seabed mining provisions contained in Part XI of the Convention, which had been raised, primarily by the industrialized countries, the Secretary-General convened in July 1990 a series of informal consultations which culminated in the adoption, on 28 July 1994, of the Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982. The Agreement entered into force on 28 July 1996.”67 The United States signed the 1994 agreement on July 29, 1994, and U.S. administrations since then have supported the United States becoming a party to UNCLOS. The United Nations includes the United States on a list of countries for which the 1994 agreement is in a status of “provisional application,” as of November 16, 1994, by virtue of its signature.68 The 1982 treaty and the 1994 agreement were transmitted to the Senate on October 6, 1994, during the 103rd Congress, becoming Treaty Document 103-39. Subsequent Senate action on Treaty Document 103-39, as presented at Congress.gov,69 can be summarized as follows:  In 2004, during the 108th Congress, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee held hearings on Treaty Document 103-39 and reported it favorably with a resolution of advice and consent to ratification with declarations and understandings. No further action was taken during the 108th Congress, and the matter was re-referred to the committee at the sine die adjournment of the 108th Congress.  In 2007, during the 110th Congress, the committee held hearings on Treaty Document 103-39 and reported it favorably with a resolution of advice and consent to ratification with declarations, understandings, and conditions. No further action was taken during the 110th Congress, and the matter was re-referred to the committee at the sine die adjournment of the 110th Congress.  In 2012, during the 112th Congress, the committee held hearings on Treaty Document 103-39. No further action was taken during the 112th Congress. The full Senate to date has not voted on the question of whether to give its advice and consent to ratification of Treaty Document 103-39. The latest Senate action regarding Treaty Document 103-39 recorded at Congress.gov is a hearing held by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on June 28, 2012. Supporters of the United States becoming a party to UNCLOS argue in connection with the Arctic that changing circumstances in the Arctic strengthen the case for the United States contrary to the interests and principles of industrialized nations and would not help attain the aspirations of developing countries. The United States does not stand alone in those concerns. Some important allies and friends have not signed the convention. Even some signatory states have raised concerns about these problems.” (Ronald Reagan Presidential Library & Museum, “Statement on United States Oceans Policy,” undated, accessed August 2, 2019, at https://www.reaganlibrary.gov/research/speeches/31083c.) 67 United Nations, “Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982,” updated September 2, 2016, accessed August 1, 2019, at https://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_agreements/convention_overview_part_xi.htm. 68 United Nations, “Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982,” status as of August 1, 2019, accessed August 1, 2019, at https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=XXI-6-a&chapter=21&clang=_en. 69 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, Senate Consideration of Treaty Document 103-39, accessed July 31, 2019, at https://www.congress.gov/treaty-document/103rd-congress/39. For a timeline of selected key events relating to the treaty, see Department of State, “Law of the Sea Convention,” March 7, 2019, accessed March 25, 2020, at https://www.state.gov/law-of-the-sea-convention/. In addition to the timeline, the website presents a list of 60 “organizations and companies that have expressed support for U.S. accession” to UNCLOS as modified by the 1994 agreement. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 21 becoming a party, on the grounds that it would improve the ability of the United States to protect its interests in the Arctic, particularly in relation to navigation rights and the continental shelf.70 Opponents of the United States becoming a party to UNCLOS argue in connection with the Arctic that “The U.S. does not need to join the convention in order to access oil and gas resources on its extended continental shelf, in the Arctic, or in the Gulf of Mexico. To the extent necessary, the U.S. can and should negotiate bilateral treaties with neighboring nations to demarcate the limits of its maritime and continental shelf boundaries…. The U.S. has successfully protected its interests in the Arctic since it acquired Alaska in 1867 and has done so during the more than 30 years that the convention has existed. The harm that would be caused by the convention’s controversial provisions far outweighs any intangible benefit that allegedly would result from U.S. accession.”71 The Obama Administration’s January 2014 implementation plan for its national strategy for the Arctic region (see earlier section) included, as one of its 36 or so initiatives, one entitled “Accede to the Law of the Sea Convention.” Under this initiative, the State Department and other federal agencies are to “continue to seek the Senate’s advice and consent to accede to the Law of the Sea Convention.” The document states that “the [Obama] Administration is committed, like the last three Administrations, to pursuing accession to the Convention on the Law of the Sea and will continue to place a priority on attaining Senate advice and consent to accession.”72 The State Department’s web page for UNCLOS provides a timeline of events relating to the law of the sea from 1958 through 2012, and a list 60 organizations and companies that have expressed support for the United States becoming a party to UNCLOS.73 Potential Alternatives or Supplements to UNCLOS Some observers over the years have occasionally suggested that a separate international legal regime be negotiated to address the changing circumstances in the Arctic. They argue that these changing circumstances were not envisioned at the time UNCLOS was negotiated. Other observers have occasionally suggested that the Arctic region above a certain parallel be designated a wilderness area. As precedent, they cite Article 4 of the Antarctic Treaty, under which any current claims to sovereign territory are frozen and No acts or activities taking place while the present Treaty is in force shall constitute a basis for asserting, supporting or denying a claim to territorial sovereignty in Antarctica or create any rights of sovereignty in Antarctica. No new claim, or enlargement of an existing claim, to territorial sovereignty in Antarctica shall be asserted while the present Treaty is in force. 70 See, for example, Dermot Cole, “Scare Tactics on Sea Treaty Put US Arctic Interests at Risk,” Arctic Today, June 17, 2019; Steve Haycox, “Why Signing the Law of the Sea Treaty Would Mean a Tougher U.S. Position in the Arctic,” Anchorage Daily News, March 22, 2018; Ben Werner, “Zukunft: U.S. Presence in Arctic Won’t Stop Chinese, Russian Encroachment Without Law of the Sea Ratification,” USNI News, August 1, 2017; John Grady, “Senators Renew Call to Ratify Law of the Sea Treaty to Help Chart Future of the Arctic,” USNI News, July 19, 2017. 71 Theodore R. Bromund, James Jay Carafano, and Brett D. Schaefer, “7 Reasons U.S. Should Not Ratify UN Convention on the Law of the Sea,” Heritage Foundation, June 4, 2018. 72 Implementation Plan for The National Strategy for the Arctic Region, January 2014, p. 29. 73 Department of State, “Law of the Sea Convention,” accessed January 23, 2020, at https://www.state.gov/law-of-the-sea-convention/. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 22 House and Senate Arctic Caucuses In the House, an Arctic Working Group Caucus is co-chaired by Representative Rick Larsen and Representative Don Young.74 In the Senate, Senator Lisa Murkowski and Senator Angus King announced on March 4 and 5, 2015, the formation of a Senate Arctic Caucus.75 Issues for Congress Climate Change and Loss of Arctic Sea Ice76 Record low extents of Arctic sea ice in 2012 and 2007 have focused scientific and policy attention on climate changes in the high north, and on the implications of projected ice-free77 seasons in the Arctic within decades. The Arctic has been projected by several scientists to be ice-free in most late summers as soon as the 2030s.78 This opens opportunities for transport through the Northwest Passage and the Northern Sea Route, extraction of potential oil and gas resources, and expanded fishing and tourism (Figure 3). More broadly, physical changes in the Arctic include warming ocean, soil, and air temperatures; melting permafrost; shifting vegetation and animal abundances; and altered characteristics of Arctic cyclones. All these changes are expected to affect traditional livelihoods and cultures in the region and survival of polar bear and other animal populations, and raise risks of pollution, food supply, safety, cultural losses, and national security. Moreover, linkages (“teleconnections”) between warming Arctic conditions and extreme events in the mid-latitude continents are increasingly evident, identified in such extreme events as the heat waves and fires in Russia in 2010; severe winters in the eastern United States and Europe in 2009/2010 and in Europe in 74 Source: United States House of Representatives, Committee on House Administration, Congressional Member Organizations (CMOs), 116th Cong., revised June 2019, p. 7, accessed July 31, 2019, at https://cha.house.gov/sites/democrats.cha.house.gov/files/documents/cmo_cso_docs/116th%20CMOs_06-03-2019.pdf. 75 Press release from the office of Senator Angus King, “King, Murkowski Announce U.S. Senate Arctic Caucus,” March 4, 2015, accessed March 17, 2015, at http://www.king.senate.gov/newsroom/press-releases/king-murkowski-announce-us-senate-arctic-caucus. See also press release from the office of Senator Lisa Murkowski, “Senators Murkowski, King Announce U.S. Senate Arctic Caucus,” March 5, 2015, accessed March 17, 2015, at http://www.murkowski.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/pressreleases?ID=1ce5edcb-540d-4c43-b264-56bdbb570755, which includes a similar phrase. 76 This section prepared by Jane Leggett, Specialist in Energy and Environmental Policy, Resources, Science, and Industry Division. 77 In scientific analyses, “ice-free” does not necessarily mean “no ice.” The definition of “ice-free” or sea ice “extent” or “area” varies across studies. Sea ice “extent” is one common measure, equal to the sum of the area of grid cells that have ice concentration of less than a set percentage—frequently 15%. For more information, see the National Snow and Ice Data Center, http://nsidc.org/seaice/data/terminology.html. 78 Muyin Wang and James E. Overland, “A Sea Ice Free Summer Arctic within 30 Years?,” Geophysical Research Letters 36, no. L07502 (April 3, 2009): 10.1029/2009GL037820; Marika Holland, Cecilia M. Bitz, and Bruno Tremblay, “Future abrupt reductions in the summer Arctic sea ice,” Geophysical Research Letters 33, no. L23503 (2006); But see also Julien Boé, Alex Hall, and Xin Qu, “Sources of spread in simulations of Arctic sea ice loss over the twenty-first century,” Climatic Change 99, no. 3 (April 1, 2010): 637-645; I. Eisenman and J. S. Wettlaufer, “Nonlinear threshold behavior during the loss of Arctic sea ice,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106, no. 1 (January 6, 2009): 28-32; Dirk Notz, “The Future of Ice Sheets and Sea Ice: Between Reversible Retreat and Unstoppable Loss,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106, no. 49 (December 8, 2009): 20590-20595. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 23 2011/2012;79 and Indian summer monsoons and droughts. Hence, changing climate in the Arctic suggests important implications both locally and across the Hemisphere. Like the rest of the globe, temperatures in the Arctic have varied80 but show a significant warming trend since the 1970s, and particularly since 1995.81 The annual average temperature for the Arctic region (from 60o to 90o N) is now about 1.8o F warmer than the “climate normal” (the average from 1961 to 1990). Temperatures in October-November are now about 9o F above the seasonal normal. Scientists have concluded that most of the global warming of the last three decades is very likely caused by human-related emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG, mostly carbon dioxide); they expect the GHG-induced warming to continue for decades, even if, and after, GHG concentrations in the atmosphere have been stabilized. The extra heat in the Arctic is amplified by processes there (the “polar amplification”) and may result in irreversible changes on human timescales. The observed warmer temperatures along with rising cyclone size and strength in the Arctic have reduced sea ice extent, thickness, and ice that persists year-round (“perennial ice”); natural climate variability has likely contributed to the record low ice extents of 2007 and 2012. The 2007 minimum sea ice extent was influenced by warm Arctic temperatures and warm, moist winds blowing from the North Pacific into the central Arctic, contributing to melting and pushing ice toward and into the Atlantic past Greenland. Warm winds did not account for the near-record sea ice minimum in 2008.82 In early August 2012, an unusually large storm with low pressure developed over the Arctic, helping to disperse the already weak ice into warmer waters and accelerating its melt rate. By August 24, 2012, sea ice extent had shrunk below the previous observed minimum of late September 2007.83 79 Overland et al., state that “a warm Arctic-cold continent pattern represents a paradox of recent global warming: there is not a uniform pattern of temperature increases” due to a set of newly recognized processes described in Overland, J. E, K. R Wood, and M. Wang. “Warm Arctic-cold Continents: Climate Impacts of the Newly Open Arctic Sea.” Polar Research 30 (2011). The authors raise a critical, unanswered question, “Is the observed severe mid-latitude weather in two adjacent years simply due to an extreme in chaotic processes alone, or do they included a partial but important Arctic forcing and connection due to recent changing conditions?” In other words, are recent patterns random anomalies, or might we expect more of the same?; among other examples, see also Lim, Young-Kwon, and Siegfried D. Schubert. “The Impact of ENSO and the Arctic Oscillation on Winter Temperature Extremes in the Southeast United States.” Geophysical Research Letters 38, no. 15 (August 11, 2011): L15706. 80 There was a regionally warm period in the Arctic from the mid-1920s to around 1940, which scientists have assessed to have been driven by natural climate variability. They have found that period to be distinctly different from the recent multi-decadal warming, in part because the early 20th century warming was concentrated in the northern high latitudes. See, for example, Figure 2, upper left graphic, in Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, “Simulatoin of Early 20th Century Warming,” at http://www.gfdl.noaa.gov/early-20th-century-global-warming. 81 Steele, Michael, Wendy Ermold, and Jinlun Zhang. “Arctic Ocean Surface Warming Trends over the Past 100 Years.” Geophysical Research Letters 35, no. 2 (January 29, 2008): L02614. 82 J. Overland, J. Walsh, and M. Wang, Arctic Report Card - Atmosphere (NOAA Arctic Research Program, October 6, 2008), ftp://ftp.oar.noaa.gov/arctic/documents/ArcticReportCard_full_report2008.pdf. 83 National Snow and Ice Data Center, “Arctic sea ice extent breaks 2007 record low” (August 27, 2012); Japanese Aerospace Exploration Agency, “A new record minimum of the Arctic sea ice extent was set on 24 August 2012”; Arctic ROOS (Norway), “Daily Updated Time series of Arctic sea ice area and extent derived from SSMI data provided by NERSC,” at http://arctic-roos.org/observations/satellite-data/sea-ice/ice-area-and-extent-in-arctic. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 24 Figure 3. Arctic Sea Ice Extent in September 2008, Compared with Prospective Shipping Routes and Oil and Gas Resources Source: Graphic by Stephen Rountree at U.S. News and World Report, http://www.usnews.com/articles/news/world/2008/10/09/global-warming-triggers-an-international-race-for-the-artic/photos/#1. Modeling of GHG-induced climate change is particularly challenging for the Arctic, but it consistently projects warming through the 21st century, with annual average Arctic temperature increases ranging from +1° to +9.0° C (+2° to +19.0° F), depending on the GHG scenario and model used. While such warming is projected by most models throughout the Arctic, some Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 25 models project slight cooling localized in the North Atlantic Ocean just south of Greenland and Iceland. Most warming would occur in autumn and winter, “with very little temperature change projected over the Arctic Ocean” in summer months.84 Due to observed and projected climate change, scientists have concluded that the Arctic will have changed from an ice-covered environment to a recurrent ice-free85 ocean (in summers) as soon as the late 2030s. The character of ice cover is expected to change as well, with the ice being thinner, more fragile, and more regionally variable. The variability in recent years of both ice quantity and location could be expected to continue. Geopolitical Environment86 Shift to Era of Renewed Great Power Competition Overview A principal factor affecting the geopolitical environment for the Arctic is the shift that has occurred in recent years from the post-Cold War era that began in the late 1980s and early 1990s, also sometimes known as the unipolar moment (with the United States as the unipolar power), to a new international security environment that features, among other things, renewed great power competition with China and Russia and challenges by these two countries and others to elements of the U.S.-led international order that has operated since World War II.87 This shift in the international security environment, combined with the diminishment of Arctic ice and the resulting increase in human activities in the Arctic, has several potential implications for the geopolitical environment for the Arctic, which are discussed in the following sections. Arctic Tradition of Cooperation and Low Tensions The renewal of great power competition has raised a basic question as to whether the Arctic in coming years will continue to be a region generally characterized by cooperation and low tensions, as it was during the post-Cold War era, or instead become a region characterized at least in part by competition and increased tensions, as it was during the Cold War. Although there continues to be significant international cooperation on Arctic issues, the Arctic is increasingly viewed as an arena for geopolitical competition among the United States, Russia, and China.88 In this regard, the renewal of great power competition poses a potential challenge to the tradition of cooperation, low tensions, peaceful resolution of disputes, and respect for international law— 84 William L. Chapman and John E. Walsh, “Simulations of Arctic Temperature and Pressure by Global Coupled Models,” Journal of Climate 20, no. 4 (February 1, 2007): 609-632. 85 See footnote 77. Also, although one Canadian scientist has predicted that recurrent ice-free summers may begin sometime between 2013 and 2020, this is not consistent with other climate models’ projections. 86 This section was prepared by Ronald O’Rourke, Specialist in Naval Affairs, Foreign Affairs, Defense, and Trade Division. It incorporates material prepared by Kristin Archick, Specialist in European Affairs, Foreign Affairs, Defense, and Trade Division, and Derek E. Mix, Analyst in European Affairs, Foreign Affairs, Defense, and Trade Division. 87 For more on this shift, see CRS Report R43838, Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 88 See, for example, Angus Parker, “Looking North: The Re-emergence of the Arctic As a Geopolitical Hotspot,” Geographical (UK), March 2, 2020; Mario Giagnorio, “A New Era in the Arctic,” New Eastern Europe, March 3, 2020 (interview with Marc Lanteigne); Mathieu Boulegue, “Military Assets in the Arctic: A Russia-West Correlation of Forces,” Russia Matters, January 22, 2020. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 26 sometimes referred to as the “Arctic spirit”—that has characterized the approach used by the Arctic states, particularly since the founding of the Arctic Council in 1996, for managing Arctic issues.89 Some observers argue that the Arctic states and other Arctic stakeholders should attempt to maintain the region’s tradition of cooperation and low tensions, and work to prevent the competition and tensions that have emerged in Europe, Asia, and elsewhere in recent years from crossing over into the Arctic. These observers argue that the Arctic tradition of cooperation and low tensions has proven successful in promoting the interests of the Arctic states and other Arctic stakeholders on a range of issues, that it has served as a useful model for other parts of the world to follow, and that in light of tensions and competition elsewhere in the world, this model is needed more now than ever.90 Other observers could argue that, notwithstanding the efforts of Arctic states and other Arctic stakeholders to maintain the Arctic as a region of cooperation and low tensions, it is unreasonable to expect that the Arctic can be kept fully isolated from the competition and tensions that have arisen in other parts of the world. As a consequence, these observers could argue, the Arctic states and other Arctic stakeholders should begin taking steps to prepare for increased competition and higher tensions in the Arctic, precisely so that Arctic issues can continue to be resolved as successfully as conditions may permit, even in a situation of competition and increased tensions. Still other observers might argue that a policy of attempting to maintain the Arctic as a region of cooperation and low tensions, though well-intentioned, could actually help encourage aggressive behavior by Russia or China in other parts of the world by giving those two countries confidence that their aggressive behavior in other parts of the world would not result in punitive costs being imposed on them in the Arctic. These observers might argue that maintaining the Arctic as a region of cooperation and low tensions in spite of aggressive Russian or Chinese actions elsewhere could help legitimize those aggressive actions and provide little support to peaceful countries elsewhere that might be attempting to resist them. This, they could argue, could facilitate a divide-and-conquer strategy by Russia or China in their relations with other countries, which in the long run could leave Arctic states with fewer allies and partners in other parts of the world for resisting unwanted Russian or Chinese actions in the Arctic. Still others might argue that there is merit in some or all of the above perspectives, and that the challenge is to devise an approach that best mixes the potential strengths of each perspective. In a May 6, 2019, speech in Finland that was given prior to the start of formal discussions at an Arctic Council ministerial meeting, Secretary of State Michael Pompeo stated 89 See, for example, Joshua Tallis, “As ‘Arctic Exceptionalism’ Melts Away, the US Isn’t Sure What It Wants Next,” Defense One, January 22, 2020; Timo Koivurova, “How US Policy Threatens Existing Arctic Governance,” Arctic Today, January 17, 2020; Melody Schreiber, “As the Arctic Changes, International Cooperation May Be Put to the Test,” Arctic Today, July 25, 2018; Stephanie Pezard, Abbie Tingstad, and Alexandria Hall, The Future of Arctic Cooperation in a Changing Strategic Environment, RAND Europe (PE-268RC), 2018, 18 pp.; Geoff Ziezulewicz, “As Arctic Waters Open, Nations Plant Their Flags,” Navy Times, April 8, 2018; James Stavridis, “Avoiding a Cold War in the High North,” Bloomberg, May 4, 2018; Kristina Spohr, “The Race to Conquer the Arctic—the World’s Final Frontier,” New Statesman, March 12, 2018. 90 See, for example, Alexandra Brzozowski, “Avoid Politicising Arctic Issues, Expert Warns,” Euractiv, February 8, 2019; Kevin McGwin, “More Military Activity May Spoil the Arctic’s Atmosphere of Collaboration, Warns a Danish Report,” Arctic Today, December 6, 2018; Hsin Hsuan Sun, “Arctic Council Sells Itself As a Model for International Cooperation at the UN,” Arctic Today, July 23, 2018; John Grady, “Panel: Cooperation, Not Conflict Key to Future of the Arctic,” USNI News, April 9, 2018; Levon Sevunts, “Arctic Nations Develop Coast Guard Co-operation,” Barents Observer, March 13, 2018; Doug Tsuruoka, “Despite US-Russia Tensions, Arctic Powers Eye Cooperation,” Asia Times, March 29, 2017. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 27 For reasons I’ll explain in a moment, the region [i.e., the Arctic] has become an arena for power and for competition. And the eight Arctic states must adapt to this new future. In its first two decades, the Arctic Council has had the luxury of focusing almost exclusively on scientific collaboration, on cultural matters, on environmental research—all important themes, very important, and we should continue to do those. But no longer do we have that luxury of the next hundred years…. To leverage the Arctic’s—the Arctic continental, all nations, including non-Arctic nations, should have a right to engage peacefully in this region. The United States is a believer in free markets. We know from experience that free and fair competition, open, by the rule of law, produces the best outcomes. But all the parties in the marketplace have to play by those same rules. Those who violate those rules should lose their rights to participate in that marketplace. Respect and transparency are the price of admission. And let’s talk about China for a moment. China has observer status in the Arctic Council, but that status is contingent upon its respect for the sovereign rights of Arctic states. The U.S. wants China to meet that condition and contribute responsibly in the region. But China’s words and actions raise doubts about its intentions. Beijing claims to be a “Near-Arctic State,” yet the shortest distance between China and the Arctic is 900 miles. There are only Arctic States and Non-Arctic States. No third category exists, and claiming otherwise entitles China to exactly nothing. That’s not to say Chinese investment is unwelcome—indeed, quite the opposite. The United States and Arctic nations welcome transparent Chinese investments that reflect economic interest and national security ambitions. Between 2012 and 2017, China invested in the Arctic nearly $90 billion. It’s planning to build infrastructure from Canada, to the Northwest Territories, to Siberia. Just last month, Russia announced plans to connect the Northern Sea Route with China’s Maritime Silk Road, which would develop a new shipping channel from Asia to northern Europe. Meanwhile, China is already developing shipping lanes in the Arctic Ocean. This is part of a very familiar pattern. Beijing attempts to develop critical infrastructure using Chinese money, Chinese companies, and Chinese workers—in some cases, to establish a permanent Chinese security presence. Our Pentagon warned just last week that China could use its civilian research presence in the Arctic to strengthen its military presence, including our deployment of submarines—including deployment of submarines to the region as a deterrent against nuclear attack. We need to examine these activities closely, and we need—and we keep the experience we have learned of other nations in mind. China’s pattern of aggressive behavior elsewhere in the—excuse me—aggressive behavior elsewhere should inform what we do and how it might treat the Arctic. Let’s just ask ourselves: Do we want Arctic nations broadly, or indigenous communities specifically, to go the way of former government in Sri Lanka or Malaysia, ensnared by debt and corruption? Do we want crucial Arctic infrastructure to end up like Chinese-constructed roads in Ethiopia, crumbling and dangerous after only a few years? Do we want the Arctic Ocean to transform into a new South China Sea, fraught with militarization and competing territorial claims? Do we want the fragile Arctic environment exposed to the same ecological devastation caused by China’s fishing fleet in the seas off its coast, or unregulated industrial activity in its own country? I think the answers are pretty clear. Then there’s Russia. As a fellow Arctic Council member, Russia – the other Arctic states have fruitfully cooperated in a number of areas—expansive conservation efforts. Those are Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 28 to be applauded. We want cooperation to continue. But we can’t have one side cooperate, and the other side derogate its duties. We’re concerned about Russia’s claim over the international waters of the Northern Sea Route, including its newly announced plans to connect it with China’s Maritime Silk Road. In the Northern Sea Route, Moscow already illegally demands other nations request permission to pass, requires Russian maritime pilots to be aboard foreign ships, and threatens to use military force to sink any that fail to comply with their demands. These provocative actions are part of a pattern of aggressive Russian behavior here in the Arctic. Russia is already leaving snow prints in the form of army boots. Russia formally announced its intent to increase its military presence in the region in 2014, when it re-opened a Cold War Arctic military base. Since then, thanks in part to its large icebreaker fleet, Russia has been able to renovate old bases and infrastructure. It claims to have built 475 new military sites, including bases north of the Arctic Circle, as well as 16 new deep-water ports. It secures this presence through sophisticated new air defense systems and anti-ship missiles. No one denies Russia has significant Arctic interests. We recognize that Russia is not the only nation making illegitimate claims. The U.S. has a long-contested feud with Canada over sovereign claims through the Northwest Passage. But Russia is unique. Its actions deserve special attention, special attention of this Council, in part because of their sheer scale. But also because we know Russian territorial ambitions can turn violent. 13,000 people have been killed due to Russia’s ongoing aggressive action in Ukraine. And just because the Artic is a place of wilderness does not mean it should become a place of lawlessness. It need not be the case. And we stand ready to ensure that it does not become so.91 91 State Department, “Looking North: Sharpening America’s Arctic Focus, Remarks, Michael R. Pompeo, Secretary of State, Rovaniemi, Finland, May 6, 2019,” accessed August 23, 2019, at https://www.state.gov/looking-north-sharpening-americas-arctic-focus/. For press reports about the speech, including reports of reactions by observers in other countries, see Blake Hounshell, “Pompeo Aims to Counter China’s Ambitions in the Arctic,” Politico, May 6, 2019; Courtney McBride, “Pompeo Issues Warning to China, Russia on Arctic,” Wall Street Journal, May 6, 2019; Simon Johnson, “Pompeo: Russia Is ‘Aggressive’ in Arctic, China’s Work There Also Needs Watching,” Reuters, May 6, 2019; Eilis Quinn (Radio Canada International), “U.S. Stuns Audience by Tongue-Lashing China, Russia on Eve of Arctic Council Ministerial,” Barents Observer, May 6, 2019; Amund Trellevik, “USA Launches Head-On Verbal Attack on Russia and China,” High North News, May 7, 2019; Amund Trellevik, “MP Argues That Pompeo Provoked Unnecessarily—Fears for High North Cooperation,” High North News, May 7, 2019; Victoria Herrmann, “Pompeo: Melting Sea Ice Presents Trade Opportunities,” CNN, May 10, 2019; Mia Bennett, “China Reveals Arctic Geopolitics to Be Above Pompeo’s Pay Grade,” Arctic Today, May 11, 2019; Dermot Cole, “Pompeo’s Bombastic Arctic Council Performance Could Prove an Aberration—Or A New Normal,” Arctic Today, May 13, 2019; Siri Gulliksen Tømmerbakke, “Strong Chinese Reactions to Pompeo’s Speech,” High North News, May 16, 2019; Arne O. Holm, “Peave and Love, My Ass,” High North News, May 16, 2019; Siri Gulliksen Tømmerbakke, “China Will Seek to Treat The Pompeo Speech As Simply ‘Road Damage’ to Be Routed Around,” High North News, May 16, 2019; Maiya Clark, “Pompeo Seeks New Strategic Agenda for Arctic, Cautions Allies on China’s Intentions, Daily Signal, May 17, 2019. The United States believes that the part of the Northwest Passage that runs through the Canadian archipelago is an international strait; Canada believes it is internal Canadian waters. Since 1985, when the use of the waterway by a U.S. polar icebreaker led to a diplomatic dispute between the United States and Canada, the two countries have agreed to disagree on the issue, and the issue had remained largely dormant. See, for example, Daniel Steinfeld, “The U.S.–Canada Northwest Passage Dispute,” Brown Political Review, April 78, 2020. Secretary Pompeo’s mention of the issue in his May 6, 2019, speech put a spotlight back on the matter. For press reports discussing this part of the speech, see Lloyd Alter, “American Secretary of State Calls Canadian Claim to Northwest Passage ‘Illegitimate,’” Tree Hugger, May 7, 2019; Jane George, “Canadian Inuit Challenge U.S. Stance on Northwest Passage,” Nunatsiaq News, May 9, Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 29 On April 23, 2020, a senior State Department official provided a background on the Trump Administration’s strategy for the Arctic. The State Department official stated the following at the opening of the briefing: I want to state a couple principles right up front, which is we have a very clear set of goals and objectives in the Arctic, and they’re quite straightforward. We want a secure and stable Arctic where U.S. interests are safeguarded, our homeland—the American homeland—is protected, and the Arctic states are working cooperatively to address shared challenges. And the department—Department of State—is working in collaboration with other agencies across the United States Government to ensure that the Arctic remains a region free of conflict as well as characterized by respect for national sovereignty, a rules-based order, constructive engagement among Arctic states to address our shared economic, scientific, and environmental challenges. We have—we are working closely with our Arctic partners through the Arctic Council, which is the premier recognized forum for matters of Arctic governance, and as folks know, it’s made up of the eight Arctic states: the United States, Canada, the Kingdom of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, the Russian Federation, and Sweden. Now, our principal focus since the—that’s been our principal focus. The work of the Arctic Council, since its formation in 1996, has been on promoting this coordination and cooperation among Arctic states and working, of course, with Arctic indigenous communities and other inhabitants on the issues that I identified. But we also are in the process of adjusting our Arctic policy to today’s new strategic realities, and those are characterized by the return of geopolitics, if I can put it that way, not just to the Arctic but generally across the globe. And it’s a change that’s driven by the desire of Russia and the People’s Republic of China to challenge the United States and the West. We see this playing out in other parts of the world. The Arctic is not immune from the implications of these changes and we can expect, as you all probably know, the rapidly changing Arctic system to create greater incentives for the Kremlin and the PRC to pursue agendas that clash with the interests of the United States and our allies and partners. … I want to be clear that the United States recognizes that Russia has legitimate Arctic interests. It’s an Arctic Council member. It’s cooperated with the United States and other Arctic states in a number of areas, including oil spill response, search and rescue, pollution issues. That work is continuing; it’s ongoing; it’s welcome. We have no concerns about it or no objections to it, and we want it to continue. But we also have concerns about Russia’s military buildup in the Arctic. Its presence has grown dramatically in recent years with the establishments of new Arctic commands, new Arctic brigades, refurbished airfields and other infrastructure, deep water ports, new military bases along its Arctic coastline, an effort to establish air defense and coastal missile systems, early warning radars, and a variety of other things along the Arctic coastline. We’ve seen an enhanced ops [operations] tempo of the Russian military in the Arctic, including last October one of the largest Russian military exercises in the Arctic since the end of the Cold War. So there is some genuine and legitimate concern there on the part of the United States and our allies and partners about that behavior in the Arctic. China is a bit of a different challenge. It claims that its interests in the Arctic are focused on access to natural resources and the opportunities offered by Arctic sea routes for 2019; Siri Gulliksen Tømmerbakke, “Canada Is Pushing Back at Pompeo’s Assertion That Canada’s Claim to the Northwest Passage is ‘Illegitimate,’” High North News, May 16, 2019; Robert Huebert, “Winning at All Costs: The Bizarre Position of the Trump Administration on the Northwest Passage,” Globe and Mail, May 20, 2019; Dermot Cole, “Insulting Canada Won’t Help the US with Its Arctic Ambitions,” Arctic Today, June 3, 2019; Alastair Allan, “Canada Needs to Cut a Deal with the U.S. to Control the Northwest Passage,” National Post (Canada), August 8, 2019. See also Melody Schreiber, “Russia and China May Lose Their Legal Claim to Arctic Seaways as Ice Melts, Experts Say,” Arctic Today, April 4, 2019. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 30 shipping. And as you all probably know, it outlined plans in 2018 to develop a Polar Silk Road, claimed it was a near-Arctic state, and signaled its intention to play a more active role in Arctic governance. We have found this disconcerting because [in] the PRC’s behavior outside the Arctic, it often disregards international norms, as it has in the South China Sea, for example. And if I can quote Secretary Pompeo, he said this last year in May of 2019 in Finland: “There are only Arctic states and non-Arctic states.” There are—“No third category exists,” so we do not accept Beijing’s claims to be a near-Artic state. And we’ve also seen across the globe that China’s soft-power tools often have a soft edge when deployed by the PRC. It’s weaponized its state capitalism in an effort to secure control of critical infrastructure such as ports and telecommunications networks. It’s demonstrated a willingness to use coercion and influence operations and other methods to get what it wants, including in the Arctic. The recent experience of the Faroe Islands over the threats to drop a trade agreement because the Faroese did not sign a 5G contract with Huawei is just one example. So their behavior, the PRC’s behavior over the last decade, underscores that we can’t necessarily assume its good intentions with regards to its activities in the Arctic. Now having said all that, I want to go back to what I said at the beginning of my brief because I think it often gets lost. In acknowledging that we have to moderate our posture because of global geopolitical changes, we are not saying and have not said—in fact the Secretary has said the exact opposite—that the work we are doing with Arctic states, the work that we are doing collaboratively internationally on environmental challenges, on sustainable development, on search and rescue, on clean-up of oil spills, all of that is continuing, should continue, and is an important and critical part of our Arctic policy and Arctic agenda. And it’s in that context, the work that we’re doing in those areas and of course the challenges we see emerging in the geopolitical scene, that we are seeking to enhance our engagement and our work right across the Arctic, not just in Greenland but in other parts—in other Arctic states as well.92 Arctic and World Order Another potential implication for the Arctic of renewal of great power competition concerns associated challenges to elements of the U.S.-led international order that has operated since World War II. One element of the U.S.-led international order that has come under challenge is the principle that force or threat of force should not be used as a routine or first-resort measure for settling disputes between countries. Another is the principle of freedom of the seas (i.e., that the world’s oceans are to be treated as an international commons).93 If either of these elements of the U.S.-led international order is weakened or overturned, it could have potentially major implications for the future of the Arctic, given the Arctic’s tradition of peaceful resolution of disputes and respect for international law and the nature of the Arctic as a region with an ocean at its center that washes up against most of the Arctic states. More broadly, some observers assess that the U.S.-led international order in general may be eroding or collapsing, and that the nature of the successor international order that could emerge in its wake is uncertain.94 An erosion or collapse of the U.S.-led international order, and its replacement by a new international order of some kind, could have significant implications for 92 State Department, Briefing on the Administration’s Arctic Strategy, Special Briefing, Office of the Spokesperson, April 23, 2020. 93 For additional discussion, see CRS Report R43838, Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress, and, regarding the principle of freedom of the seas, CRS Report R42784, U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas: Background and Issues for Congress. 94 For additional discussion, see CRS Report R44891, U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 31 the Arctic, since the Arctic’s tradition of cooperation and low tensions, and the Arctic Council itself, can be viewed as outgrowths of the U.S.-led order. Arctic Governance Spotlight on Arctic Governance and Limits of Arctic Council The renewal of great power competition has put more of a spotlight on the issue of Arctic governance and the limits of the Arctic Council as a governing body.95 As noted earlier in this report, regarding the limits of the Arctic Council as a governing body, the council states that “The Arctic Council does not and cannot implement or enforce its guidelines, assessments or recommendations. That responsibility belongs to each individual Arctic State. The Arctic Council’s mandate, as articulated in the Ottawa Declaration, explicitly excludes military security.”96 During the post-Cold War era—the period when the Arctic Council was established and began operating—the limits of the Arctic Council as a governing body may have been less evident or problematic, due to the post-Cold War era’s general situation of lower tensions and reduced overt competition between the great powers. In the new situation of renewed great power competition, however, it is possible that these limits could become more evident or problematic, particularly with regard to addressing Arctic-related security issues. If the limits of the Arctic Council as a governing body are judged as having become more evident or problematic, one option might be to amend the rules of the council to provide for some mechanism for enforcing its guidelines, assessments, or recommendations. Another option might be to expand the council’s mandate to include an ability to address military security issues. Supporters of such options might argue that they could help the council adapt to the major change in the Arctic’s geopolitical environment brought about the shift in the international security environment, and thereby help maintain the council’s continued relevance in coming years. They might also argue that continuing to exclude military security from the council’s mandate risks either leaving Arctic military security issues unaddressed, or shifting them to a different forum that might have traditions weaker than those of the Arctic Council for resolving disputes peacefully and with respect for international law. 95 See, for example, Rashmi Ramesh, “Changing Geopolitics of the Arctic: Challenges for Governance,” IndraStra, April 9, 2020; Angus Parker, “Looking North: How Should the Arctic Be Governed?” Geographical (UK), March 17, 2020; Kevin McGwin, “An Arctic Treaty Has Been Rejected by the Region’s Leaders. Again; Academics Will Tell You the Idea of an Arctic Treaty Sounds Terribly Exciting. Diplomats Think It Is Just Terrible.: Arctic Today, February 12, 2020; Marc Lanteigne, “So You Want to Write an Arctic Treaty?” Over the Circle, February 10, 2020; Roman Chuffart, “Is the Arctic Council a Paper Polar bear?” High North News, November 29, 2019; David Balton and Fran Ulmer, A Strategic Plan for the Arctic Council: Recommendations for Moving Forward, The Arctic Initiative (Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School) and The Polar Institute (Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars), June 2019, 15 pp.; Mckenna Coffey, “Concerns Rise Over Governance Gap in Arctic,” New Security Beat (Wilson Center), August 5, 2019; Melody Schreiber, “Will the Arctic Council Begin Addressing National Security?” Arctic Today, May 17, 2019; Arne O. Holm, “Does the Arctic Council Have Enough Power in It to Keep the Arctic a Peaceful Region?” High North News, April 27, 2019; Gosia Smieszek, “Costs and Reality of Reforming the Arctic Council,” Arctic Institute, April 9, 2019; John Grady, “Old Treaties Called Into Question as Arctic Competition Increases,” USNI News, December 20, 2016. 96 Arctic Council, “The Arctic Council: A Backgrounder,” updated September 13, 2018, accessed August 2, 2018, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 32 Opponents of such options might argue that they could put at risk council’s ability to continue addressing successfully nonmilitary security issues pertaining to the Arctic. They might argue that there is little evidence to date that the council’s limits as a governing body have become problematic, and that in light of the council’s successes since its founding, the council should be viewed as an example of the admonition, “if it isn’t broke, don’t fix it.”97 China and Arctic Governance China—which is not one of the eight Arctic states and consequently does not have a decisionmaking role in the Arctic Council—has begun to raise questions as to whether the Arctic Council as currently constituted and the current broader legal framework for the Arctic should continue to be the principal means for addressing issues relating to the Arctic, and has begun to use other approaches for influencing Arctic governance.98 In May 2019, a U.S. official stated that the United States “reject[s] attempts by non-Arctic states to claim a role” in Arctic governance.99 Relative Priority of Arctic in U.S. Policymaking The renewal of great power competition has raised a question concerning the priority that should be given to the Arctic in overall U.S. policymaking. During the post-Cold War era, when the Arctic was generally a region of cooperation and low tensions, there may have been less need to devote U.S. policymaker attention and resources to the Arctic. Given how renewed great power competition and challenges to elements of the U.S.-led international order might be expressed in the Arctic in terms of issues like resource exploration, disputes over sovereignty and navigation rights, and military forces and operations, it might be argued that there is now, other things held equal, more need for devoting U.S. policymaker attention and resources to the Arctic.100 On the other hand, renewed great power competition and challenges to elements of the U.S.-led international order are also being expressed in Europe, the Middle East, the Indo-Pacific, Africa, and Latin America. As a consequence, it might be argued, some or all these other regions might similarly be in need of increased U.S. policymaker attention and resources. In a situation of constraints on total U.S. policymaker attention and resources, the Arctic competes against these other regions for U.S. policymaker attention and resources. As one expression of this issue, it was reported in January 2020 that 3,000 of a planned force of about 10,500 U.S. military personnel 97 For press reports discussing the question of security issues, see Abbie Tingstad, “Today’s Arctic Diplomacy Can’t Handle Tomorrow’s Problems,” Defense One, January 29, 2020; Siri Gulliksen Tømmerbakke, “Why Finland and Iceland Want Security Politics in the Arctic Council,” Arctic Today, October 25, 2019. For a general discussion of the limits of the Arctic Council and what, if anything, to do about it, see, for example, Heather Exner-Pirot et al., “Form and Function: The Future of the Arctic Council,” Arctic Institute, February 5, 2019. See also Marc Lanteigne, “The Growing Role of ‘Track II’ Organisations in the Arctic,” Over the Circle, May 23, 2018. 98 See, for example, Pan Yixuan, “Global Governance Needed for Arctic Affairs,” China Daily, May 10, 2019; Zhang Yao, “Ice Silk Road Framework Welcomed by Countries, Sets New Direction for Arctic Cooperation,” Global Times, April 7, 2019; Liu Caiyu, “China’s Role in Arctic Governance ‘Cannot Be Ignored,’” Global Times, November 22, 2018; Harriet Moynihan, “China Expands Its Global Governance Ambitions in the Arctic,” Chatham House, October 15, 2018; Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “China & Russia In The Arctic: Axis Of Ambivalence,” Breaking Defense, July 6, 2018; Nengye Liu and Michelle Lim, “How Arctic Governance Could Become a Testing Ground for Sino-US Relations,” The Conversation, March 29, 2017. 99 Reuters, “US Rejects Interference by Non-Arctic Countries in Polar Region: Official,” Arctic Today, May 3, 2019. 100 For an article bearing on this issue, see Heather A. Conley and Matthew Melino, “The Implications of U.S. Policy Stagnation toward the Arctic Region,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, May 2019, 5 pp. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 33 scheduled to participate in a cold-weather exercise in Norway in March 2020 were to be diverted to perform missions elsewhere.101 U.S., Canadian, and Nordic Relations with Russia in Arctic Overview The renewal of great power competition raises a question for U.S., Canadian, and Nordic policymakers regarding the mix of cooperation and competition to pursue (or expect to experience) with Russia in the Arctic. In considering this question, points that can be noted include the following:  Geographically, Russia is the most prominent of the eight Arctic states. According to one assessment, Russia “has at least half of the Arctic in terms of area, coastline, population and probably mineral wealth.”102 About 20% of Russia’s land mass is north of the Arctic Circle.103 Russia has numerous cities and towns in its Arctic, uses its coastal Arctic waters as a maritime highway for supporting its Arctic communities, is promoting the Northern Sea Route that runs along Russia’s Arctic coast for use by others, and is keen to capitalize on natural resource development in the region, both onshore and offshore. A substantial fraction of Russia’s oil and gas production and reserves are in the Arctic. In this sense, of all the Arctic states, Russia might have the most at stake in the Arctic in absolute terms.104  The Arctic is a top strategic priority for Russia. In 2008, 2013, 2014, 2017, and most recently in March 2020, the Russian government adopted strategy documents outlining plans to bolster the country’s Arctic military capabilities, strengthen territorial sovereignty, and develop the region’s resources and infrastructure.105 Over the past several years, Russia has invested in the construction of ports and search-and-rescue facilities, some of which are referred 101 John Vandiver, “US Troops Slated for Big Arctic Exercise Get Shifted to Other Missions,” Stars and Stripes, January 17, 2020; Alte Staalesen, “American Forces Withdraw from Allied Exercise in Arctic Norway,” Arctic Today, January 17, 2020. 102 “The Arctic: Special Report,” The Economist, June 16, 2012, p. 11. As noted in the “Background” section of this CRS report, of the 4 million or so people who live above the Arctic Circle, roughly half are in Russia. 103 Testimony of Admiral Charles W. Ray, Coast Guard Vice Commandant, on “Expanding Opportunities, Challenges, and Threats in the Arctic: a Focus on the U.S. Coast Guard Arctic Strategic Outlook” before the Senate Commerce, Science, & Transportation Security Subcommittee, December 12, 2019, p. 3. 104 See also Stephanie Pezard, The New Geopolitics of the Arctic, Russia’s and China’s Evolving Role in the Region, RAND (Testimony presented before the Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and International Development of the Canadian House of Commons on November 26, 2018), pp. 1-2. 105 Regarding the March 2020 document, see, for example, Ekaterina Klimenko, “Russia’s New Arctic Policy Document Signals Continuity Rather Than Change – Analysis,” Eurasia Review, April 20, 2020; Atle Staalesen, “Putin Signs Arctic Master Plan,” Barents Observer, March 6, 2020; United Press International, “Putin Signs 15-Year Plan to Invest in Arctic with Jobs, Military Upgrades,” Oil & Gas 360, March 6, 2020; Charles Digges, “Putin Unveils More Plans to Boost Northern Sea Route,” Maritime Executive, March 7, 2020; Alexandra Brzozowski, “Russia Significantly Steps Up Arctic Engagement with New Strategy,” Euractiv, March 9, 2020. See also Marc Lanteigne, “The Best-Laid Plans? Russia’s New Arctic Strategies Face Many Hurdles,” Over the Circle, March 12, 2020; Sergey Sukhankin, “Russia Steps up Efrforts to Dominate Arctic Region,” Eurasia Daily Monitor, February 24, 2020; Jamestown Foundation, “Russia Doubles Down On Its Arctic Ambitions,” OilPrice.com, February 15, 2020; Rachel Menosky, “Russia’s Plan to Move on the Arctic,” Heritage Foundation, January 29, 2020; Nazrin Mehdiyeva, Russia’s Arctic Papers: The Evolution of Strategic Thinking on the High North, NATO Defense College, November 19, 2018. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 34 to as dual use (civilian-military) facilities. Russia also has reactivated and modernized military bases that fell into disuse with the end of the Cold War.  Arctic ice is diminishing more rapidly or fully on the Russian side of the Arctic than it is on the Canadian side. Consequently, the Northern Sea Route along Russia’s coast is opening up more quickly for trans-Arctic shipping than is the Northwest Passage through the Canadian archipelago. On the one hand, the United States, Canada, and the Nordic countries continue to cooperate with Russia on a range of issues in the Arctic, including, to cite just one example, search and rescue (SAR) under the May 2011 Arctic Council agreement on Arctic SAR (see “Search and Rescue (SAR)”). More recently, the United States and Russia cooperated in creating a scheme for managing two-way shipping traffic through the Bering Strait and Bering Sea.106 Observers see possibilities for further U.S.-Russian cooperation in the Arctic.107 On the other hand, as discussed later in this report, a significant increase in Russian military capabilities and operations in the Arctic in recent years has prompted growing concerns among U.S., Canadian, and Nordic observers that the Arctic might once again become a region of military tension and competition, as well as concerns about whether the United States, Canada, and the Nordic countries are adequately prepared militarily to defend their interests in the region. In February 2020, a disagreement between Norway and Russia arose regarding Russia’s access to Svalbard, a Norwegian archipelago, under the Svalbard Treaty of 1920.108 Russian actions outside the Arctic could affect relations between Russia and the other Arctic states. For example, in protest of Russia’s forcible occupation and annexation of Crimea and its actions elsewhere in Ukraine, Canada announced that it would not participate in an April 2014 working-level-group Arctic Council meeting in Moscow.109 In addition, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton reportedly stated that Arctic cooperation may be jeopardized if Russia pursues 106 See, for example, U.S. Coast Guard, “U.S., Russia Propose Bering Strait Ship Traffic Routing Measures,” January 25, 2018; Amy Midgett, “U.S., Russia Jointly Propose Bering Strait Routing Measures,” Coast Guard Maritime Commons, January 25, 2018; Amy Midgett, “IMO Approves U.S.-Russian Federation Proposal for Bering Strait Routing Measures,” Coast Guard Maritime Commons, May 25, 2018; Yereth Rosen, “With Marine Traffic Growing, International Shipping Agency Approves US-Russia Plan for Bering Strait Shipping Lanes,” Arctic Today, May 26, 2018; Associated Press, “Maritime Organization Approves Two-Way Shipping Routes in Bering Strait,” CBC, May 27, 2018; “U.S., Russia Propose Bering Strait Traffic Routing,” Maritime Executive, May 27, 2018; Margaret Kriz Hobson, “Amid Ice Melt, New Shipping Lanes Are Drawn Up off Alaska,” E&E News (Scientific American), May 29, 2018. 107 See, for example, Levon Sevunts (Radio Canada International), “In the Arctic As in Space, Russia and West Can Look Past Differences to Pursue Common Goals: Study,” Eye on the Arctic (Radio Canada International), June 14, 2019; Mike Sfraga and Lawson Brigham, “US, Russia Can Look North to the Arctic to Find Common Ground,” The Hill, July 17, 2018. See also Martin Breum “Why Russia Is Likely to Remain Cooperative in the Arctic,” Arctic Today, November 22, 2018. 108 See, for example, Nerijus Adomaitis, “Norway Rejects Moscow’s Claim It Violated Svalbard Treaty,” Reuters, February 21, 2020; Luke Coffey, “Russia’s and China’s Interest in Cold Svalbard Heats Up,” National Interest, February 13, 2020; Pavel K. Baev, “Moscow Plays Hard Ball in the High North,” Eurasia Daily Monitor, February 10, 2020; Brett Davis, “Russia Has Always Challenged Norway on Svalbard. This Time Parts of Its Criticism is [sic] Different,” High North News, February 10, 2020; Jennifer Alvarez, “As Russia Returns to Svalbard,” KXAN Daily News, February 9, 2020; Marc Lanteigne, “Norway, Russia, and a Changing Svalbard,” Over the Circle, February 7, 2020; Arme O. Holm, “If Russia Wants More Power on Svalbard, There Is A Far More Efficient Method,” High North News, February 6, 2020; Atle Staalesen, “Amid Jubilant Celebration at Svalbard, Norway Sends Strong Signal It Will Not Accept Encroachment on Sovereignty,” Barents Observer, February 9, 2020; Amund Trtellevik, “Russia With Stern Svalbard Warning to Norway,” High North News, February 5, 2020; Tom Balmforth and Nerijus Adomaitis, “Russia Accuses Norway of Restricting Its Activities on Arctic Islands,” Reuters, February 4, 2020. 109 For additional discussion of Canadian-Russian relations regarding the Arctic, see Sergey Sukhankin, “Russia’s Arctic Agenda and the Role of Canada,” Eurasia Daily Monitor, April 15, 2020. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 35 expansionist policies in the high north.110 Economic sanctions that the United States imposed on Russia in response to Russian actions in Ukraine could affect Russian Arctic offshore oil exploration.111 Northern Sea Route Another concern for U.S. policymakers in connection with Russia in the Arctic relates to the Northern Sea Route (NSR)—the Arctic shipping route linking Europe and Asia via waters running along Russia’s Arctic coast. Russia considers certain parts of the NSR to be internal Russian waters and has asserted a right to regulate commercial shipping passing through these waters112—a position that creates a source of tension with the United States, which considers those waters to be international waters. The U.S.-Russian dispute over this issue could have implications not only for U.S.-Russian relations and the Arctic, but for other countries and other parts of the world as well, since international law is universal in its application, and a successful challenge to international waters in one part of the world can serve as a precedent for challenging it in other parts of the world. The issue of the U.S.-Russian dispute over the international legal status of the NSR was largely dormant for many years. In March 2019, however, Russia announced that The Russian government has elaborated a set of rules for foreign naval vessels’ sailing on the Northern Sea Route, [the Russian newspaper] Izvestia informs. The newspaper has obtained a copy of the document that states that all vessels are obliged to comply. The foreign state must send a notification about the voyage at least 45 days ahead of its start. Included will have to be the name of the ship, its objective, route and period of sailing, as well as ship characteristics such as length, width, deadweight, draft and type of engine power. Also the name of the ship captain must be listed. The ships must also have on board a Russian maritime pilot. In case the voyage is not conducted in line with the regulations, Russia will have the right to take extraordinary measures including its forced halt, arrest and in extreme cases elimination, Izvestia writes.113 110 Naval Exercise on Hold Due to Ukraine Tensions. Navy Times. March 13, 2014. Hillary Warns Against Russia in Arctic. Barents Observer. April 3, 2014. http://barentsobserver.com/en/arctic/2014/04/hillary-warns-against-russia-arctic-03-04 Canada Takes Principled Stand on Arctic Council Meetings. Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Trade, and Development Canada. April 15, 2014, http://www.international.gc.ca/media/arctic-arctique/news-communiques/2014/04/15a.aspx?lang=eng, Crimea Crises Changes Nordic Defense Perspective. 111 See, for example, Reuters staff, “Expanded U.S. Sanctions May Affect Russia’s Foreign Expansion in Oil and Gas” Reuters, November 19, 2017. 112 See, for example, James Foggo III, “Russia, China Offer Challenges in the Arctic,” Defense One, July 10, 2019; Dmitry Sudakov, “Russia Closes Northern Sea Route for Foreign Warships,” Pravda Report, May 30, 2019; Nastassia Astrasheuskaya and Henry Foy, “Polar Powers: Russia’s Bid for Supremacy in the Arctic Ocean,” Financial Times, April 27, 2019; James R. Holmes, “Don’t Let Russia Create a ‘Caribbean’ in the Arctic,” The Hill, March 28, 2019; Marex (Maritime Executive), “Russia Tightens Control Over Northern Sea Route,” Maritime Executive, March 8, 2019; Atle Staalesen, “Russia Sets Out Stringent New Rules for Foreign Ships on the Northern Sea Route,” Barents Observer, March 8, 2019; Will Stewart, “Moscow Threatens to Sink Foreign Ships Using Arctic Sea Route That Links Atlantic to the Pacific Unless It Is Given 45 Days Notice of Voyages and Vessels Take a Russian Pilot on Board,” Daily Mail, March 6, 2019; “Russia Will Restrict Foreign Warships in Arctic Ocean, Defense Official Says,” Moscow Times, November 30, 2018. 113 Atle Staalesen, “Izvestia: This Is What Awaits Foreign Military Vessels on Northern Sea Route,” Barents Observer, March 7, 2019. (A similar version published as Atle Staalesen, “Russia Sets Out Stringent New Rules for Foreign Ships on the Northern Sea Route,” Arctic Today, March 8, 2019.) See also Maritime Executive, “Russia Tightens Control Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 36 In September 2019, it was reported that Russia had used military commandos to board a Russian-flag commercial ship operating in the NSR that Russian authorities suspected of violating certain regulations.114 NATO and European Union in Arctic NATO Five of the eight Arctic states—the United States, Canada, Denmark, Iceland, and Norway—are members of NATO. The renewal of great power competition has led to a renewal of NATO interest in NATO’s more northerly areas. During the Cold War, NATO member Norway and its adjacent sea areas were considered to be the northern flank of NATO’s defensive line against potential aggression by the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact alliance. With the end of the Cold War and the shift to the post-Cold War era, NATO planning efforts shifted away from defending against potential aggression by Russia, which was considered highly unlikely, and toward other concerns, such as the question of how NATO countries might be able to contribute to their own security and that of other countries by participating in out-of-area operations, meaning operations in areas outside Europe. With the renewal of great power competition, NATO is now once again focusing more on the question of how to deter potential Russian aggression against NATO countries, including in the Arctic.115 As one consequence of that, Norway and its adjacent sea areas are once again receiving more attention in NATO planning.116 For example, a NATO exercise called Trident Juncture 18 that was held from October 25 to November 7, 2018, in Norway and adjacent waters of the Baltic and the Norwegian Sea, with participation by all 29 NATO members plus Sweden and Finland, was described as NATO’s largest exercise since the Cold War, and featured a strong Arctic element, including the first deployment of a U.S. Navy aircraft carrier above the Arctic Circle Over Northern Sea Route,” Maritime Executive, March 8, 2019; Will Stewart, “Russia Warning: Moscow Could Sink or Detain Foreign Ships in Arctic Waters under New Rules,” Express (UK), March 6, 2019. 114 See Atle Staalesen, “Navy Commandos Board Cargo vessel on Northern Sea Route,” Barents Observer, September 13, 2019. See also Luke Coffey, “Cold truth about Russia’s Arctic ambitions and Northern Sea Route,” Arab News, March 14, 2020. 115 See, for example, Rebecca Pincus, “NATO North? Building a Role for NATO in the Arctic,” War on the Rocks, November 6, 2019; Anna Wieslander, “It’s Time for NATO to Engage in the Arctic,” Defense One, September 16, 2019; Tyler Cross, “The NATO Alliance’s Role in Arctic Security,” Maritime Executive, July 19, 2019. 116 See, for example, Teri Schultz, “NATO and Washington Worry About Russian Subs in the High North,” Deutsche Welle, April 26, 2018. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 37 since 1991.117 The question of NATO’s overall involvement in the Arctic, however, has been a matter of debate within NATO.118 European Union Three of the eight Arctic states—Denmark, Finland, and Sweden—are members of the European Union (EU), and two other Arctic states—Iceland and Norway—have close ties to the EU as members of the European Economic Area. The EU is showing increased interest in the Arctic,119 and the European Parliament (EP) supports an active EU role in the Arctic.120 The EU is considered an “observer in principle” to the Arctic Council, but to date has been denied full observer status at the council, alternately by Canada (because of Canadian Inuit objections to the EU’s ban on the import of seal products) and Russia (following heightened EU-Russian tensions since Russia’s 2014 invasion of Ukraine).121 In 2016, the European Commission (the EU’s executive) and the EU’s High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy issued a joint communication (or policy paper), An Integrated 117 See, for example, Kevin McGwin, “The EU Moves Toward a New Arctiv Straegy—and a More Independent Role I the Region,” Arctic Today, December 11, 2019; Christopher Woody, “‘We Can Do Better’: The Navy’s Newest Fleet Commander Says US Ships and Sailors Got ‘Beat Up’ During NATO’s Biggest Exercise Since the Cold War,” Business Insider, December 4, 2018; Levon Sevunts, “NATO’s Arctic Dilemma; Two Visions of the Arctic Collide as NATO and Russia Flex Muscles,” Radio Canada International, December 3, 2018; Megan Eckstein, “Truman CSG: Arctic Strike Group Operations Required Focus on Logistics, Safety,” USNI News, November 6, 2018; Mary Thompson-Jones, “NATO’s Arctic Exercise is a Good Start to Standing Up to Russian Militarization of the High North,” National Interest, November 6, 2018; Pierre-Henry Deshayes, “Antifreeze and Balaclavas: NATO Troops in cold War Games,” Military.com, November 2, 2018; Vasco Cotovio and Frederik Pleitgen, “Submarines a Centerpiece of Russia’s Navy,” CNN, November 19, 2018; Shawn Snow, “The Corps’ Armor Makes a Big Showing in Norway as Marines Test Future Force,” Marine Corps Times, October 25, 2018; Terje Solsvik, “As Winter Comes, NATO Kicks Off Largest Maneuvers Since Cold War,” Reuters, October 25, 2018; Kyle Rempfer, “US Breaches the Arctic with Marines, Fighter Jets and Aircraft Carriers,” Military Times, October 23, 2018; Megan Eckstein, “Truman Carrier Strike Group Operating North of Arctic Circle; First Time for US Navy Since 1991,” USNI News, October 19, 2018; Thomas Gooley, “HST Strike Group Enters Arctic Circle, Prepares for NATO Exercise,” DVIDS (Defense Visual Information Distribution Service), October 19, 2018; Thomas Nilsen, “US Marines Launch Exercise in Northern Norway Ahead of Trident Juncture,” Barents Observer, October 15, 2018. 118 See, for example, Luke Coffey and Daniel Kochis, “Brussels NATO Summit 2018: Time to Get Serious About the Arctic,” Heritage Foundation, June 27, 2018 (Issue Brief 4875), p. 1. 119 See, for example, Atle Staalesen, “Member of the European Parliament Comes to Barents Coast Calls for Stronger EU Engagement in Arctic,” Barents Observer, February 13, 2020; Romain Chuffart and Andreas Raspotnik, “The EU and Its Arctic Spirit: Solving Arctic Climate Change from Home?” European View, Vol. 18, No. 2, 2019: 156-162; Kevin McGwin, “The EU Is Poised to Take a Broader—and More Proactive—Role in the Arctic,” Arctic Today, November 27, 2019; Adam Stepien and Andreas Raspotnik, “Can the EU’s Arctic Policy Find True North?” Centre for European Policy Studies (CEPS), September 11, 2019; Wesley Morgan, “Politico Pro Q&A: EU Ambassador at Large for the Arctic Marie-Anne Coninsx,” Politico Pro, August 6, 2019; Adam Stepien and Andreas Raspotnik, “The EU’s Arctic Policy: Between Vision and Reality,” College of Europe Policy Brief, August 2019, 5 pp.; Martin Breum, “Spurred by Chinese and Russian Activity, EU President Juncker Is Making the Arctic More Central to EU Policy,” Arctic Today, February 20, 2019. See also Natalia Skripnikova and Andreas Raspotnik, “Has Russia Heard about the European Union’s Arcticness? The EU’s Arctic Steps As Seen from Russia,” Polar Record (Cambridge University Press), March 26, 2020. 120 In March 2017, the EP adopted a resolution largely endorsing the 2016 joint communication on an integrated EU policy for the Arctic (by 483 votes to 100, with 37 abstentions). (European Parliament, Resolution on An Integrated EU Policy for the Arctic, P8_TA(2017)0093, March 16, 2017.) The resolution advocated keeping the Arctic a low-tension area, recognized the important role of the Arctic Council in maintaining constructive cooperation and stability in the region, and called upon the EU to develop a more concrete EU Arctic strategy and action plan. 121 Kamrul Hossain, “EU Engagement in the Arctic: Do the Policy Responses from the Arctic States Represent the EU as a Legitimate Stakeholder?,” Arctic Review on Law and Politics, Vol. 6, No. 2, November 2015. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 38 European Union Policy for the Arctic, that states that a “safe, stable, sustainable, and prosperous Arctic” is important for the region, the EU, and the world, and that “the EU has a strategic interest in playing a key role in the Arctic region.”122 The policy outlined in the document seeks to boost the EU’s profile in the region and focuses on three broad themes—climate change and safeguarding the environment, sustainable development in the Arctic, and international cooperation on Arctic issues. In 2017, the EU appointed its first Ambassador-at-Large for the Arctic, and in October 2019, the EU held its first-ever Arctic Forum, a high-level conference in northern Sweden focused on promoting EU efforts in the Arctic.123 The EU is also a major financial contributor to Arctic research, providing around €200 million in the past decade under the Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Program.124 Some analysts contend, however, that the EU’s policy statements on the Arctic have yet to coalesce into a clearly defined narrative with concrete goals; the European Commission’s in-house think tank argues that the EU must develop a more comprehensive strategy that balances protecting the Arctic environment with facilitating the sustainable economic and social development of the region.125 China in Arctic China’s Growing Activities in Arctic China’s activities in the Arctic have grown steadily in recent years, and have emerged as a major topic of focus for the Arctic in a context of renewed great power competition. As noted earlier in this report, China was one of six non-Arctic states that were approved for observer status by the Arctic Council in 2013.126 China in recent years has engaged in growing diplomatic activities with the Nordic countries, and has increased the size of its diplomatic presences in some of them. China has also engaged in growing economic discussions with Iceland and with Greenland, a territory of Denmark that might be moving toward eventual independence.127 China has a polar-capable icebreaker, Xue Long (Snow Dragon), that in recent years has made several transits of Arctic waters—operations that China describes as research expeditions.128 A second polar-capable icebreaker (the first that China has built domestically), named Xue Long 2, 122 European Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Joint Communication to the European Parliament and the Council, An Integrated European Union Policy for the Arctic, April 27, 2016, p. 2. 123 Martin Breum, “EU Plays Catch-up with US, China, Russia in Arctic,” EUObserver.com, October 3, 2019. 124 European Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Joint Communication to the European Parliament and the Council, An Integrated European Union Policy for the Arctic, April 27, 2016, p. 2. 125 European Political Strategy Centre/European Commission, Walking on Thin Ice: A Balanced Arctic Strategy for the EU, July 2019; Adam Stepien and Andreas Raspotnik, “The EU’s Arctic Policy: Between Vision and Reality,” College of Europe Policy Brief, August 2019. 126 The other five were India, Italy, Japan, Singapore, and South Korea. For the full list of observers and when they were approved for observer status, see Arctic Council, “Observers,” accessed July 20, 2018, at https://arctic-council.org/index.php/en/about-us/arctic-council/observers. 127 See, for example, Marc Lanteigne, “Greenland’s Widening World,” Over the Circle, March 28, 2020; Marco Volpe, “The Tortuous Path of China’s Win-Win Strategy in Greenland,” Arctic Institute, March 24, 2020; Marc Lanteigne, “Stumbling Block: China-Iceland Oil Exploration Reaches an Impasse,” Over the Circle, January 24, 2018. “Greenland Plans Office in Beijing to Boost Trade Ties with China,” Reuters, July 18, 2018. 128 See, for example, “Icebreaker Sets Sail on China’s 9th Arctic Research Expedition,” Xinhua, July 20, 2018; “China Begins 9th Arctic Expedition to Help Build ‘Polar Silk Road,’” Global Times, July 20, 2018. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 39 entered service in 2019.129 China in 2018 announced an intention to build a 30,000-ton (or possibly 40,000-ton) nuclear-powered icebreaker,130 which would make China only the second country (following Russia) to operate a nuclear-powered icebreaker. In December 2019, however, it was reported that China’s third polar-capable icebreaker might instead be built as a 26,000-ton, conventionally powered ship.131 (By way of comparison, the new polar icebreakers being built for the U.S. Coast Guard are to displace 22,900 tons each.) Like several other nations, China has established a research station in the Svalbard archipelago. China in January 2018 released a white paper on China’s Arctic policy that refers to China as a “near-Arctic state.”132 (China’s northernmost territory, northeast of Mongolia, is at about the same latitude as the Aleutian Islands in Alaska, which, as noted earlier in this report, the United States includes in its definition of the Arctic for purposes of U.S. law.) The white paper refers to trans-Arctic shipping routes as the Polar Silk Road, and identifies these routes as a third major transportation corridor for the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), China’s major geopolitical 129 “China Delivers First Self-Built Icebreaking Research Vessel,” People’s Daily Online, July 12, 2019; Kamaran Malik, “China Launches First Locally-made Icebreaker,” Asia Times, July 11, 2019. 130 See Trym Aleksander Eiterjord, “Checking in on China’s Nuclear Icebreaker,” Diplomat, September 5, 2019; Thomas Nilsen, “Details of China’s Nuclear-Powered Icebreaker Revealed,” Barents Observer, March 21, 2019; Zhao Yusha, “China One Step Closer to Nuke-Powered Aircraft Carrier with Cutting-Edge Icebreaker Comes on Stream,” ChinaMil.com, June 23, 2018; China Daily, “China’s 1st Nuclear-Powered Icebreaker in the Pipeline,” People’s Daily Online, June 25, 2018; Kyle Mizokami, “China Is Planning a Nuclear-Powered Icebreaker,” Popular Mechanics, June 25, 2018; China Military Online, “Why Is China Building a 30,000-Ton Nuclear-Powered Icebreaker?” ChinaMil.com, June 30, 2018. 131 Malte Humpert, “China Reveals Details of a Newly Designed Heavy Icebreaker,” Arctic Today, December 17, 2019. 132 “Full Text: China’s Arctic Policy,” Xinhua, January 26, 2018, accessed July 20, 2018, at http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2018-01/26/c_136926498.htm. The white paper states that “China is an important stakeholder in Arctic affairs. Geographically, China is a ‘Near-Arctic State’, one of the continental States that are closest to the Arctic Circle. The natural conditions of the Arctic and their changes have a direct impact on China’s climate system and ecological environment, and, in turn, on its economic interests in agriculture, forestry, fishery, marine industry and other sectors. China is also closely involved in the trans-regional and global issues in the Arctic, especially in such areas as climate change, environment, scientific research, utilization of shipping routes, resource exploration and exploitation, security, and global governance. These issues are vital to the existence and development of all countries and humanity, and directly affect the interests of non-Arctic States including China.” Somewhat similarly, France’s June 2016 national roadmap for the Arctic refers to France as a “polar nation.” (Republique Francaise, Ministere des Affaires Etrangeres et du Developpement International, The Great Challenge of the Arctic, National Roadmap for the Arctic, June 2016, 60 pp.) The document states on page 9 that “France has established itself over the last three centuries as a polar nation, with a strong tradition of expeditions and exploration, and permanent research bases at the poles,” and on page 17 that “[b]uilding on its long-standing tradition of exploration and expeditions in high latitudes, France has carved out its place as a polar nation over the last three centuries. France has permanent scientific bases in the Arctic and in Antarctica.” It can also be noted that the northernmost part of mainland France, next to Belgium and across the Strait of Dover from England, is almost as far north as the more southerly parts of the Aleutian Islands. Also somewhat similarly, a November 2018 UK parliamentary report refers to the UK as a “near-Arctic neighbour.” The report states the following: “While the UK is not an Arctic state, it is a near-Arctic neighbour. The UK’s weather system is profoundly affected by changes in the Arctic’s climate and sea currents. The UK has been an Observer to the Arctic Council since 1998.” (United Kingdom, House of Commons, Environmental Audit Committee, The Changing Arctic, Twelfth Report of Session 2017-19, November 29, 2018, p. 3. [Report, together with formal minutes relating to the report, Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed November 6, 2018]. See also pp. 6, 29, and 32.) See also Eva Dou, “A New Cold War? China Declares Itself a ‘Near-Arctic State,’ Wall Street Journal, January 26, 2018; Grant Newsham, “China As A ‘Near Arctic State’—Chutzpah Overcoming Geography,” Asia Times, January 30, 2018. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 40 initiative, first announced by China in 2013, to knit Eurasia and other regions together in a Chinese-anchored or Chinese-led infrastructure and economic network.133 China appears to be interested in using the NSR to shorten commercial shipping times between Europe and China and perhaps also to reduce China’s dependence on southern sea routes (including those going to the Persian Gulf) that pass through the Strait of Malacca—a maritime choke point that China appears to regard as vulnerable to being closed off by other parties (such as the United States) in time of crisis or conflict.134 China reportedly reached an agreement with Russia on July 4, 2017, to create an “Ice Silk Road,”135 and in June 2018, China and Russia agreed to a credit agreement between Russia’s Vnesheconombank (VEB) and the China Development Bank that could provide up to $9.5 billion in Chinese funds for the construction of select infrastructure projects, including in particular projects along the NSR.136 In September 2013, the Yong Shen, a Chinese cargo ship, became the first commercial vessel to complete the voyage from Asia to Rotterdam via the NSR.137 China is interested in oil and gas exploration in the Arctic, and has made significant investments in Russia’s Arctic oil and gas industry, including the Yamal natural gas megaproject located on Russia’s Yamal Peninsula in the Arctic.138 China is also interested in mining opportunities in the Arctic seabed and in Greenland.139 Given Greenland’s very small population, China may view Greenland as an entity that China can seek to engage using an approach similar to ones that China 133 See, for example, Marc Lanteigne, “The Twists and Turns of the Polar Silk Road,” Over the Circle, March 15, 2020; Zhang Chun, “China’s ‘Arctic Silk Road,’” Maritime Executive, January 10, 2020; Sabena Siddiqui, “Arctic Ambition: Beijing Eyes the Polar Silk Road,” Asia Times, October 25, 2018. The BRI’s other two main corridors, which were announced at the outset of the BRI, are a land corridor that runs east to west across the middle of Eurasia—the “belt” in BRI—and a sea corridor called the Maritime Silk Road that passes through the South China Sea and the Indian Ocean to the Persian Gulf and the Mediterranean Sea—the “road” in BRI. For more on the BRI, see CRS In Focus IF10273, China’s “One Belt, One Road”, by Susan V. Lawrence and Gabriel M. Nelson. See also Atle Staalesen, “Chinese Money for Northern Sea Route,” Barents Observer, June 12, 2018. See also Lin Boqiang, “China Can Support Arctic Development as Part of B&R,” Global Times, August 9, 2018. 134 See, for example, Jonathan Hall, “Arctic Enterprise: The China Dream Goes North,” Journal of Political Risk, September 2019. 135 Xinhua, “China, Russia agree to jointly build ‘Ice Silk Road,’” Xinhuanet, July 4, 2017. 136 Atle Staalesen, Chinese Money for Northern Sea Route,” Barents Observer, June 12, 2018. See also Xie Wenwen (Caixin Globus), “For Chinese Companies, Investment I Arctic Infrastructure Offers Both Opportunities and Challenges,” Arctic Today, June 17, 2019. 137 “Chinese Make First Successful North Sea Route Voyage,” The Arctic Journal, September 12, 2013. See also Malte Humpert, “Chinese Shipping Company COSCO To Send Record Number of Ships Through Arctic,” High North News, June 13, 2019; Marex (Maritime Executive), “Russia and China Sign Arctic Deal,” Maritime Executive, June 8, 2019. 138 See, for example, Malte Humpert (High North News), “China Acquires 20 Percent Stake in Novatek’s Arctic LNG 2 Project,” Arctic Today, April 30, 2019; Ernesto Gallo and Giovanni Biava, “A New Energy Frontier Called ‘Polar Silk Road,’” China Daily, April 12, 2019. 139 See, for example, Mingming Shi and Marc Lanteigne, “A Cold Arena? Greenland as a Focus of Arctic Competition,” Diplomat, June 10, 2019; Nadia Schadlow, “Why Greenland Is Really About China,” The Hill, August 28, 2019; Marc Lanteigne and Mingming Shi, “China Steps up Its Mining Interests in Greenland,” Diplomat, February 12, 2019; John Simpson, “How Greenland Could Become China’s Arctic Base,” BBC, December 18, 2018; Marc Lanteigne, “Do Oil and Water Mix? Emerging China-Greenland Resource Cooperation,” Over the Circle, November 2, 2018; Martin Breum, “China and the US Both Have Strategic Designs for Greenland,” Arctic Today, October 17, 2018; Mia Bennett, “The Controversy over Greenland Airports Shows China Isn’t Fully Welcome in the Arctic—Yet,” Arctic Today, September 13, 2018; Mingming Shi and Marc lanteigne, “The (Many0 Roles of Greenland in china’s Developing Arctic Policy,” Diplomat, March 30, 2018; Miguel Martin, “China in Greenland: Mines, Science, and Nods to Independence,” China Brief, March 12, 2018. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 41 has used for engaging with small Pacific and Indian Ocean island states.140 China may also be interested in Arctic fishing grounds. China’s growing activities in the Arctic may also reflect a view that as a major world power, China should, like other major world powers, be active in the polar regions for conducting research and other purposes. (Along with its growing activities in the Arctic, China has recently increased the number of research stations in maintains in the Antarctic.) Particularly since China published its Arctic white paper in January 2018, observers have expressed curiosity or concern about China’s exact mix of motivations for its growing activities in the Arctic, and about what China’s ultimate goals for the Arctic might be.141 Arctic States’ Response The renewal of great power competition underscores a question for the Arctic states regarding whether and how to respond to China’s growing activities in the Arctic. China’s growing activities in the Arctic could create new opportunities for cooperation between China and the 140 For further discussion of China-Greenland relations, see Kevin McGwin, “Greenland Lawmakers Will Consider Opening an East Asia Office,” Arctic Today, April 6, 2020. 141 See, for example, Yun Sun, “Defining the Chinese Threat in the Arctic,” Arctic Institute, April 7, 2020; Sanna Kopra, “China and its Arctic Trajectories: The Arctic Institute’s China Series 2020,” Arctic Institute, March 17, 2020; Atle Staalesen, “China’s Ambassador Brushes Off Allegations His Country Is Threat in Arctic,” Barents Observer, February 16, 2020; Luke Coffey, “China’s Increasing Role in the Arctic,” Heritage Foundation, February 11, 2020; Jacquelyn Chorush, “Is China Really Threatening Conquest in the Arctic?” High North News, January 6, 2020; Mike Green, “China’s Arctic Ambitions Spark Fear Among U.S. Military Leaders,” Washington Times, December 26, 2019; Ryan D. Martinson, “The Role of the Arctic in Chinese Naval Strategy,” China Brief, December 20, 2019; Anne-Marie Brady, “Facing Up to China’s Military Interests in the Arctic,” China Brief, December 10, 2019; Jacquelyn Chorush, “Concerns About China in the Arctic Dominate Canadian Security Forum,” High North News, December 4, 2019; Nikolaj Skydsgaard and Jacob Gronholt-Pedersen, “China Mixing Military and Science in Arctic Push: Denmark,” Reuters, November 29, 2019; Lyle J. Goldstein, “What Does China Want with the Arctic?” National Interest, September 7, 2019; Malte Humpert, Explaining China’s Arctic Interests, the U.S.’ Efforts to Re-Engage, and the Growing Split Between the Two Countries,” High North News, September 6, 2019; Malte Humpert, “China Looking to Expand Satellite Coverage in Arctic, Experts Warn Of Military Purpose,” High North News, September 4, 2019; “Mark Rosen, “Will China Freeze America Out of the Arctic?” National Interest, August 14, 2019; Heljar Havnes and Johan Martin Seland, “The Increasing Security Focus in China’s Arctic Policy,” Arctic Institute, July 16, 2019; Mercy A. Kuo, “The US and China’s Arctic Ambitions, Insights from Malte Humpert,” Diplomat, June 11, 2019; Global Risk Insight, “Why Is China Pouring Money Into The Arctic?” Oil Price, June 8, 2019; Somini Sengupta and Steven Lee Myers, “Latest Arena for China’s Growing Global Ambitions: The Arctic,” New York Times, May 24, 2019; Michael Lelyveld, “China’s Arctic Investments Generate Heat,” Radio Free Asia, May 24m, 2019; David Auerswald, “China’s Multifaceted Arctic Strategy,” War on the Rocks, May 24, 2019; John Vandiver, “China Tops Agenda as Military Leaders from 11 Nations Mull Arctic Security,” Stars and Stripes, May 6, 2019; Marc Lanteigne, “China’s Emerging Strategies in the Arctic,” High North News, April 19 (updated April 24), 2019; Sherman Xiaogang Lai, “China’s Arctic Policy and Its Potential Impact on Canada’s Arctic Security,” Center for International Maritime Security (CIMSEC), April 17, 2019; James Stavridis, “China Is Joining the Rush for Arctic Riches,” Bloomberg, April 16, 2019; Joel Gehrke, “US Wary of Chinese Military Threat in the Arctic,” Washington Examiner, February 8, 2019; Omair Ahmad, “What Role for China and India in the Arctic?” Third Pole, February 4, 2019; Bethlehem Feleke, “Beijing Is Building Influence in the Arctic,” CNN, December 30, 2018; Emanuele Scimia, “China’s Advances in Arctic May Pose Security Threat to Canada,” Asia Times, December 26, 2018; Fermin Koop, “Reykjavik Meeting Seals China’s Commitment to Arctic Expansion,” Chinadialogue Ocean, November 21, 2018; Rebecca Pincus and Walter A. Berbrick, “Gray Zones in a Blue Arctic: Grappling with China’s Growing Influence,” War on the Rocks, October 24, 2018; Kevin McGwin, “Copenhagen Is Ignoring Russia, Chinese Activity in the Arctic, Lawmakers Warn,” Arctic Today, October 17, 2018; Trym Aleksander Eiterjord, “The Growing Institutionalization of China’s Polar Silk Road; China Is Building an Increasingly Mature Platform to Support Its Scientific and Commercial Interests in the Arctic,” Diplomat, October 7, 2018. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 42 Arctic states.142 They also, however, have the potential for posing challenges to the Arctic states in terms of defending their own interests in the Arctic.143 For U.S. policymakers, a general question is how to integrate China’s activities in the Arctic into the overall equation of U.S.-China relations, and whether and how, in U.S. policymaking, to link China’s activities in the Arctic to its activities in other parts of the world. Some observers see potential areas for U.S.-Chinese cooperation in the Arctic.144 Other observers view the Arctic as emerging arena of U.S.-China strategic competition.145 A specific question could be whether to impose punitive costs on China in the Arctic for unwanted actions that China takes elsewhere. As one potential example of such a cost-imposing action, U.S. policymakers could consider moving to suspend China’s observer status on the Arctic Council146 as a punitive cost-imposing measure 142 See, for example, Atle Staalesen, “As Arctic Talks Move to China, Leaders Downplay Divides,” Barents Observer, May 11, 2019; Thomas Nilsen, “China Seeks a More Active Role in the Arctic,” Barents Observer, May 11, 2019; Nathan Vanderklippe, “Agreeing on the Arctic: Amid Dispute, Canada Sides with China over the U.S. on How to Manage the North,” Globe and Mail, May 10, 2019; “China and Finland: The Ice Road Cometh?” Over the Circle, March 17, 2020; Nong Hong, “Arctic Ambitions of China, Russia—and Now the US—Need Not Spark a Cold War,” South China Morning Post, March 11, 2019. 143 See, for example, Mingming Shi and Marc Lanteigne, “China’s Central Role in Denmark’s Arctic Security Policies,” Diplomat, December 08, 2019; Humphrey Hawksley, “Nordic Nations Can Stand Up to China in the Arctic,” Nikkei Asian Review, June 13, 2019; Thomas Nilsen, “‘We Must Be Prepared for Clearer Chinese Presence in Our Neighborhood’; Chief of Norway’s Military Intelligence Service, Lieutenant General Morten Haga Lunde, Highlighted Chinese, Russian Arctic Cooperations in His Annual Focus Report,” Barents Observer, February 11, 2019. 144 See, for example, Stephen Delaney, “The United States Must Work with China to Ensure Freedom of Navigation in the Arctic,” Global Security Review, September 6, 2019; Alison McFarland, “Arctic Options: Why America Should Invest in a Future with China,” National Interest, September 30, 2018. 145 See, for example, Simone McCarthy, “Trade, tech … and Now the Arctic? The Next Frontier in the China-US Struggle for Global Control,” South China Morning Post, January 14, 2020 (ellipse as in the article’s title); Chen Zinan, “To Keep Hegemony, US Trying to Obstruct China’s Rights in Arctic,” Global Times, December 25, 2019. 146 Paragraph 37 of the Arctic Council’s rules of procedure states the following: Once observer status has been granted, Observers shall be invited to the meetings and other activities of the Arctic Council unless SAOs [Senior Arctic Officials] decide otherwise. Observer status shall continue for such time as consensus exists among Ministers. Any Observer that engages in activities which are at odds with the Council’s [Ottawa] Declaration [of September 19, 1996, establishing the Council] or these Rules of Procedure shall have its status as an Observer suspended. Paragraph 5 of Annex II of the Arctic Council’s rules of procedure—an annex regarding the accreditation and review of observers—states the following: Every four years, from the date of being granted Observer status, Observers should state affirmatively their continued interest in Observer status. Not later than 120 days before a Ministerial meeting where Observers will be reviewed, the Chairmanship shall circulate to the Arctic States and Permanent Participants a list of all accredited Observers and up-to-date information on their activities relevant to the work of the Arctic Council. (Arctic Council, Arctic Council Rules of Procedure, p. 9. The document was accessed July 26, 2018, at https://oaarchive.arctic-council.org/handle/11374/940. Paragraph 4.3 of the Arctic Council’s observer manual for subsidiary bodies states in part Observer status continues for such time as consensus exists among Ministers. Any Observer that engages in activities which are at odds with the Ottawa Declaration or with the Rules of Procedure will have its status as an Observer suspended. (Arctic Council. Observer Manual for Subsidiary Bodies, p. 5. The document was accessed July 26, 2018, at https://oaarchive.arctic-council.org/handle/11374/939.) See also Kevin McGwin, “After 20 years, the Arctic Council Reconsiders the Role of Observers,” Arctic Today, October 24, 2018. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 43 for unwanted Chinese actions in the South China Sea.147 As mentioned earlier, in a May 6, 2019, speech in Finland, Secretary of State Pompeo stated (emphasis added) The United States is a believer in free markets. We know from experience that free and fair competition, open, by the rule of law, produces the best outcomes. But all the parties in the marketplace have to play by those same rules. Those who violate those rules should lose their rights to participate in that marketplace. Respect and transparency are the price of admission. And let’s talk about China for a moment. China has observer status in the Arctic Council, but that status is contingent upon its respect for the sovereign rights of Arctic states. The U.S. wants China to meet that condition and contribute responsibly in the region. But China’s words and actions raise doubts about its intentions.148 In February 2019, it was reported that the United States in 2018 had urged Denmark to finance the construction of airports that China had offered to build in Greenland, so as to counter China’s attempts to increase its presence and influence there.149 In May 2019, the State Department announced plan for establishing a permanent diplomatic presence in Greenland.150 In April 2020, the U.S. government announced $12.1 million economic aid package for Greenland that the Trump Administration presented as a U.S. action done in a context of Chinese and Russian actions aimed at increasing their presence and influence in Greenland.151 Some observers argue that a desire to preclude China (or Russia) from increasing its presence and influence in Greenland may have been one of the reasons why President Trump in August 2019 expressed an interest in the idea of buying Greenland from Denmark.152 147 For more on China’s actions in the South China Sea and their potential implications for U.S. interests, see CRS Report R42784, U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas: Background and Issues for Congress. 148 State Department, “Looking North: Sharpening America’s Arctic Focus, Remarks, Michael R. Pompeo, Secretary of State, Rovaniemi, Finland, May 6, 2019,” accessed August 23, 2019, at https://www.state.gov/looking-north-sharpening-americas-arctic-focus/. 149 Drew Hinshaw and Jeremy Page, “How the Pentagon Countered China’s Designs on Greenland; Washington Urged Denmark to Finance Airports that Chinese Aimed to Build on North America’s Doorstep,” Wall Street Journal, February 10, 2019. See also Marc Lanteigne, “Greenland’s Airport Saga: Enter the US?” Over the Circle, September 18, 2018; Marc Lanteigne, “Greenland’s Airports: A Balance between China and Denmark?” Over the Circle, June 15, 2018; Arne Finne (translated by Elisabeth Bergquist), “Intense Airport Debate in Greenland,” High North News, May 30, 2018. 150 State Department, “Secretary Pompeo Postpones Travel to Greenland, Press Statement, Morgan Ortagus, Department Spokesperson, May 9, 2019. See also Krestia DeGeorge, “US State Department Announces Plans for a Diplomatic Presence in Greenland,” Arctic Today, May 9, 2019; Morten Soendergaard Larsen and Robbie Gramer, “Trump Puts Down New Roots in Greenland,” Foreign Policy, November 8, 2019. 151 For a State Department briefing about the economic aid package, see State Department, Briefing on the Administration’s Arctic Strategy, Special Briefing, Office of the Spokesperson, April 23, 2020. For press reports about the economic aid package, see, for example, Jessica Donati, “U.S. Offers Aid to Greenland to Counter China, Russia,” Wall Street Journal, April 23, 2020; Carol Morello, “U.S. to Give Aid to Greenland, Open Consulate in Bid to Counter Russia and China,” Washington Post, April 23, 2020; Jacob Gronholt-Pedersen and Humeyra Pamuk, “US Extends Economic Aid to Greenland to Counter China, Russia in Arctic,” Reuters, April 23, 2020; Laura Kelly, “US Announces New Funding for Greenland in Push for Stronger Arctic Presence,” The Hill, April 23, 2020; Paul McCleary, “Battle For The Arctic: Russia Plans Nuke Icebreaker, US Counters China In Greenland,” Breaking Defense, April 23, 2020; Katrina Manson and Richard Milne, “US Financial Aid for Greenland Sparks Outrage in Denmark,” Financial Times, April 23, 2020; Alex Fang, “US Rejects China's ‘Near-Arctic State’ Claim in New Cold War; Washington to Open Consulate in Greenland and Give Economic Aid,” Nikkei Asian Review, April 24 (updated April 26), 2020. 152 See, for example, Marc Lanteigne and Mingming Shi, “‘No Sale’: How Talk of a US Purchase of Greenland Reflected Arctic Anxieties,” Over the Circle, September 17, 2020; Stuart Lau, “Did China’s Growing Presence in Arctic Prompt Donald Trump’s Offer to Buy Greenland?” South China Morning Post, September 1, 2019; Nadia Schadlow, “Why Greenland Is Really About China,” The Hill, August 28, 2019; Daniel Lippman, “Trump’s Greenland Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 44 For Russia, the question of whether and how to respond to China’s activities in the Arctic may pose particular complexities. On the one hand, Russia is promoting the NSR for use by others, in part because Russia sees significant economic opportunities in offering icebreaker escorts, refueling posts, and supplies to the commercial ships that will ply the waterway. In that regard, Russia presumably would welcome increased use of the route by ships moving between Europe and China. More broadly, Russia and China have increased their cooperation on security and other issues in recent years, in no small part as a means of balancing or countering the United States in international affairs, and Russian-Chinese cooperation in the Arctic can both reflect and contribute to that cooperation.153 On the other hand, Russian officials are said to be wary of China’s continued growth in wealth and power, and of how that might eventually lead to China becoming the dominant power in Eurasia, and to Russia being relegated to a secondary or subordinate status in Eurasian affairs relative to China. Increased use by China of the NSR could accelerate the realization of that scenario: As noted above, the NSR forms part of China’s geopolitical Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). Some observers argue that actual levels of Sino-Russian cooperation in the Arctic are not as great as Chinese or Russian announcements about such cooperation might suggest.154 Linkages Between Arctic and South China Sea Another potential implication of the renewal of great power competition is a linkage that is sometimes made between the Arctic and the South China Sea relating to international law of the sea or the general issue of international cooperation and competition.155 One aspect of this linkage Gambit Finds Allies Inside Government,” Politico, August 24, 2019; Seth Borenstein (Associated Press), “Icy Arctic Becomes Hot Property for Rival Powers,” Navy Times, August 22, 2019; Ragnhild Grønning, “Why Trump Is Looking to Buy Greenland—Even If It’s Not for Sale,” High North News, August 19, 2019. 153 See, for example, Mario Giagnorio, “A Cold Relation: Russia, China and Science in the Arctic,” New Eastern Europe, March 25, 2020 (interview with Rasmus Gjedssø Bertelsen and Mariia Kobzeva); Alana Monteiro, “Strategic Partnership, Arctic-Style: How Russia and China Play the Game,” Modern Diplomacy, March 14, 2020; Matteo Giovannini, “China and Russia Strengthen Strategic Partnership Along ‘Polar Silk Road,’” China Daily, December 6, 2019; “Russia Reinforces its Arctic Policies (With China Alongside),” Over the Circle, April 19, 2019: Melody Schreiber, “US Has ‘Vital National Interests’ at Stake in Russia-China Relationship in the Arctic, Expert Says,” Arctic Today, April 2, 2019; Rebecca Pincus, China and Russia in the Arctic, Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission Hearing on “An Emerging China-Russia Axis? Implications for the United States in an Era of Strategic Competition,” March 21, 2019; Liz Ruskin, “China, Russia Find Common Cause in Arctic,” Alaska Public Media, March 21, 2019; Olga Alexeeva and Frederic Lasserre, “An Analysis of Sino-Russian Cooperation in the Arctic in the BRI Era,” Advances in Polar Science, December 2018: 269-282; Marc Lanteigne, “Northern Crossroads, Sino-Russian Cooperation in the Arctic,” National Bureau of Asian Research, March 2018, 6 pp. Nicholas Groffman, “Why China-Russia Relations Are Warming Up in the Arctic,” South China Morning Post, February 17, 2018. 154 See, for example, Ling Guo and Steven Lloyd Wilson, “China, Russia, and Arctic Geopolitics,” Diplomat, March 29, 2020; James Foggo III, “Russia, China Offer Challenges in the Arctic,” Defense One, July 10, 2019; Anita Parlow, “Does a Russia-China Alignment in the Arctic Have Staying Power?” Arctic Today, June 27, 2019; Marc Lanteigne, “Scenes from a Northern Crossroad: China and Russia in the Arctic,” Over the Circle, February 20, 2019; Marc Lanteigne, “No Borderline: A Norway-Russia Frontier Festival Connects with China,” Over the Circle, February 16, 2019; Atle Staalesen, “Beijing Finds a Chinatown on NoRway’s Arctic Coast,; The Asian Superpower Looks towards the Arctic and Finds a Home in This Year’s Barents Spektakel Winter Festival,” Barents Observer, February 12, 2019; Elizabeth Wishnick, “Russia and the Arctic in China’s Quest for Great-Power Status,” in Ashley J. Tellis, Alison Szalwinski, and Michael Wills, editors, Strategic Asia 2019, China’s Expanding Strategic Ambitions, National Bureau of Asian Research, Seattle and Washington, DC, pp. 64-75. 155 See, for example, Robinson Meyer, “The Next ‘South China Sea’ Is Covered in Ice,” Atlantic, May 15, 2019; Justin D. Nankivell, “The Role of History and Law in the South China Sea and Arctic Ocean,” Maritime Awareness Project, August 7, 2017; Sydney J. Freedberg, “Is The Arctic The next South China Sea? Not Likely,” Breaking Defense, Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 45 relates to whether China’s degree of compliance with international law of the sea in the South China Sea has any implications for understanding potential Chinese behavior regarding its compliance with international law of the sea (and international law generally) in the Arctic. A second aspect of this linkage, mentioned earlier, is whether the United States should consider the option of moving to suspend China’s observer status on the Arctic Council as a punitive cost-imposing measure for unwanted Chinese actions in the South China Sea. A third aspect of this linkage concerns the question of whether the United States should become a party to UNCLOS: Discussions of that issue sometimes mention both the situation in the South China Sea156 and the extended continental shelf issue in the Arctic.157 Extended Continental Shelf Submissions, Territorial Disputes, Sovereignty Issues For additional background information on extended continental shelf submissions, territorial disputes, and sovereignty issues in the Arctic, see Appendix E. U.S. Military Forces and Operations158 Overview U.S. military forces, particularly the Navy and Coast Guard, have begun to pay more attention to the Arctic in their planning and operations. The Department of Defense (DOD), the Navy, and the Coast Guard have all issued Arctic strategy documents in recent years. Whether DOD and the military services are adequately resourcing these strategies and taking appropriate and adequate actions for defending U.S. interests in the Arctic—such as establishing a strategic port in Alaska’s north or building ice-hardened ships other than icebreakers—has emerged as a topic of debate and congressional oversight.159 During the Cold War, the Arctic was an arena of military competition between the United States and the Soviet Union, with both countries, for example, operating nuclear-powered submarines, long-range bombers, and tactical combat aircraft in the region. The end of the Cold War and the collapse of most elements of the Russian military establishment following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December 1991 greatly reduced this competition and led to a reduced emphasis on the Arctic in U.S. military planning. August 4, 2017; Caroline Houck, “The Arctic Could Be the Next South China Sea, Says Coast guard Commandant,” Defense One, August 1, 2017; Daniel Thomassen, “Lessons from the Arctic for the South China Sea,” Center for International Maritime Security, April 4, 2017. 156 For further discussion of this situation, see CRS Report R42784, U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas: Background and Issues for Congress. 157 See, for example, Ben Werner, “Zukunft: U.S. Presence in Arctic Won’t Stop Chinese, Russia Encroachment Without Law of the Sea Ratification,” USNI News, August 1, 2017. 158 This section prepared by Ronald O’Rourke, Specialist in Naval Affairs, Foreign Affairs, Defense, and Trade Division. 159 See, for example, Dermot Cole, “The US Writes, But Does Not Implement, Arctic Strategies,” Arctic Today, January 13, 2020; John M. Doyle, “U.S. Lacks Ice Hardened Ships, Repair and Refueling Ports for Arctic Ops,” Seapower, March 4, 2020; Ben Werner, “Navy, Marines Tell Congress Emphasis on Arctic is Growing,” USNI News, March 5, 2020. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 46 Renewed tensions with Russia following its seizure and annexation of Crimea in March 2014, combined with a significant increase in Russian military capabilities and operations in the Arctic in recent years,160 have led to growing concerns among U.S. officials and other observers that the Arctic is once again becoming a region of military tension and competition,161 and to concerns about whether the United States is adequately prepared militarily to defend its interests in the region.162 As noted earlier, Russia since 2008 has adopted a series of strategy documents outlining plans that call for, among other things, bolstering the country’s Arctic military capabilities. Russia has reactivated and modernized military bases that fell into disuse with the end of the Cold War, and in December 2014 established a new Arctic Joint Strategic Command at Severomorsk, the home of the Russian navy’s Northern Fleet. U.S. military officials, military officials from other Arctic states, and other observers have stressed the cooperative aspects of how the Arctic states have addressed Arctic issues, and have sometimes suggested that the competitive aspects of the situation have been exaggerated in some 160 Regarding the increase in Russian military capabilities and operations in the Arctic, see, for example, Atle Staalesen, “Navy Gets New Vessel for Secret Underwater operations in Arctic,” Barents Observer, April 14, 2020; Thomas Nilsen, “Northern Fleet Warplanes Perform Stratospheric Drill Over Arctic,” Barents Observer, April 11, 2020; Atle Staalesen, “New Arctic Base Sets Up Air Defense Missile System,” Barents Observer, April 7, 2020; Malte Humpert, “Russia Activates Newest S-300 Air Defense Unit in the Arctic,” High North News, April 7, 2020; Heather A. Conley and Joseph S. Bermudez Jr., “Ice Curtain: Tiksi Airbase—Many Russian Announcements, Little Equipment,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, March 26, 2020; Heather A. Conley and Joseph S. Bermudez Jr., “Ice Curtain: Why Is There a New Russian Military Facility 300 Miles from Alaska?” Center for Strategic and International Studies, March 24, 2020; Matthew Melino, Heather A. Conley, and Joseph S. Bermudez Jr., Modernization on the Kola Peninsula, Center for Strategic and International Studies, March 2020, March 2020, 15 pp.; Matthew Melino and Heather A. Conley, “The Ice Curtain: Russia’s Arctic Military Presence,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, 2020; Malte Humpert, “New Satellite Images Reveal Extent of Russia’s Military and Economic Buildup in the Arctic,” High North News, May 3, 2019, updated December 31, 2019; by Marc Lanteigne, “Russia’s Expanding Military Strategies in the Arctic (and US Reactions),” Over the Circle, December 24, 2019; Malte Humpert, “Satellite Images Reveal New Russian Long-Range Radar in the Arctic,” High North News, December 17, 2019; Atle Staalesen, “Deployment of S-400 in Arctic Bases Creates Air Defense Shield Over Northern Russia,” Barents Observer, December 11, 2019; Tom Balmforth, “Russia Plans to Set Up Arctic Air Defense ‘Dome’ with S-400 Missiles,” Reuters, December 9, 2019; Joseph Trevithick, “Russia Plans To Set Up Massive New Radar Array To Help ‘Control’ The Arctic Region,” The Drive, December 2, 2019; Editorial Team, “Russia Flaunts Increased Military Strength on Norway Border,” Life in Norway, December 2, 2019; Jamie Dettmer, “Russia Ups the Ante in the Arctic,” Voice of America, November 6, 2019; Charlie Bradley, “Putin Lays Down Arctic Gauntlet to Trump as Russian Military Starts Nuclear War Games,” Express (UK), October 16, 2019; Atle Staalesen, “Russia’s New Arctic Missile System Comes to Pechenga Valley,” Barents Observer, August 27, 2019; Atle Staalesen, “Weapons Arrive to Russia’s New Arctic Garrison,” Barents Observer, August 5, 2019; Atle Staalesen, “Russia Establishes a New Arctic Air Squadron to Protect the Northern Sea Route,” Arctic Today, July 19, 2019. 161 See, for example, Terri Moon Cronk, “Climate Change Opens Door to Arctic for Competitors, DOD Official Says,” DOD News, December 13, 2019; Laurence Peter, “Danes See Greenland Security Risk Amid Arctic Tensions,” BBC News, November 29, 2019; Gwladys Fouche, “On Norway’s Icy Border with Russia, Unease over Military Buildup,” Reuters, November 6, 2019; Jackie Northam, “In A Remote Arctic Outpost, Norway Keeps Watch On Russia’s Military Buildup,” NPR, November 3, 2019; John Grady, “NORTHCOM Says U.S., Canada Must Maintain ‘Clear-Eyed’ View of Arctic Threats,” USNI News, July 23, 2019; Russ Read, “NORTHCOM Commander Warns the Arctic Is An ‘Avenue of Approach’ for Russia,” Washington Examiner, July 22, 2019; David Brennan, “Battle for the Arctic: U.S. Warms Russia ‘Is Way Ahead of US’ in Race to Control New Frontier,” Newsweek, July 19, 2019. 162 See, for example, Mathieu Boulegue, “Military Assets in the Arctic: A Russia-West Correlation of Forces,” Russia Matters, January 22, 2020; Liz Ruskin, “Russia’s Military Dominance over Arctic Grows While US Treads Water, Security Experts Tell Senate Panel,” KTOO, December 17, 2019; Shawn Snow, “NORTHCOM Commander Says US Needs Arctic Early Warning System,” Military Times, November 26, 2019; Christopher Woody, “Russia Is Finding New Islands in the Arctic, While the US Is Still Trying to Figure Out How to Get Up There,” Business Insider, October 29, 2019; Hal Brands, “America Is Losing the Battle of the Arctic,” Bloomberg, July 30, 2019. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 47 press accounts.163 Some observers argue that that Russia’s recent military investment in the Arctic is being exaggerated, or reflects normal modernization of aging capabilities, or is intended partly for domestic Russian consumption.164 Even so, U.S. military forces (and U.S. intelligence agencies)165 are paying renewed attention to the Arctic. This is particularly true in the case of the Navy and Coast Guard, for whom diminishment of Arctic sea ice is opening up new operating areas for their surface ships. The U.S. Air Force, Army, and Marine Corps, too, are now focusing more on Arctic operations.166 Canada, the UK, and the Nordic countries are taking or contemplating steps to increase their own military presence and operations in the region.167 163 See, for example, Mia Bennett, “U.S. Rhetoric About the Strategic Importance of the Arctic Is Out of Step with Its Spending Priorities,” Arctic Today, July 26, 2019; “Arctic Conflict With Russia ‘Not Likely In The Short-Term’, Analyst Says,” Forces, January 30, 2019; Danita Catherine Burke, “Why the New Arctic ‘Cold War’ Is a Dangerous Myth,” The Conversation, December 13, 2018; Martin Breum, “Why Russia Is Likely to Remain Cooperative in the Arctic,” Arctic Today, November 22, 2018; John Grady, “Panel: Cooperation, Not Conflict Key to Future of the Arctic,” USNI News, April 8, 2018; Levon Sevunts,” NATO Wants to Keep the Arctic An Area of Low Tensions, Stoltenberg,” Radio Canada International, April 4, 2018; Levon Sevunts, “Arctic Nations Develop Coast Guard Co-operation,” Independent Barents Observer, March 13, 2018. 164 See, for example, Elizabeth Buchanan and Mathieu Boulègue, “Russia’s Military Exercises in the Arctic Have More Bark Than Bite,” Foreign Policy, May 20, 2019; Arne F. Finne, “Russia Is a Responsible Actor in the Arctic,” High North News, January 22, 2019; Stephanie Pezard, The New Geopolitics of the Arctic, Russia’s and China’s Evolving Role in the Region, RAND (Testimony presented before the Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and International Development of the Canadian House of Commons on November 26, 2018), pp. 2-4 (which presents comments on both sides of the issue of whether other countries should be concerned by Russia’s Arctic military capabilities); Thomas Nilsen, “New Weapons Testing Is Worrying, But Does Not Raise Tensions in the North, [Norway’s] Defense Minister Says,” Barents Observer, August 26, 2018. See also Hilde-Gunn Bye, “From Norway to North America: Differing Views On New Russian Weapon Systems,” High North News, February 24, 2020. 165 See Brian Bennett and W.J. Hennigan, “US Builds Up Arctic Spy Network As Russia, China Increase Presence,” Los Angeles Times, September 7, 2015. 166 See, for example, Larissa Kyzer, “US Stealth Bombers Fly Over Iceland,” Iceland Review, March 20, 2020; Christopher Woody, “US B-2 Stealth Bombers Teamed Up with Norwegian F-35s for Another Flight over Iceland,” Business Insider, March 19, 2020; Thomas Nilsen, “First-time Norwegian F-35 Trained Together with B-2 Nuke-Bombers Up North,” Barents Observer, March 17, 2020; Alaska National Guard, “R-and-D Experts Test Ideas in Frigid Arctic Eagle 2020 Exercise,” U.S. Army, March 6, 2020; Alaska National Guard, “Alaska National Guard’s Exercise Arctic Eagle 2020 Begins,” U.S. Army, February 19, 2020; Maria Kiselyova and Gwladys Fouche, “Russia Alarmed by U.S. Air Force Visit to Norwegian Island,” Reuters, February 13, 2020; Oriana Pawlyk, “F-22 Stealth Fighters Make History with Extreme Cold-Weather Remote Refueling,” Military.com, February 7, 2020; Kevin McGwin, “A US Helping Hand to Norway in Jan Mayen Also Extends the Pentagon’s Arctic Reach,” Arctic Today, January 31, 2020; Hilde-Gunn Bye, “USA in the High North—A Lasting Engagement,” High North News, January 24, 2020; Christopher Woody, “The US Air Force Is Fixing Up a Remote Base That Could Help Keep an Eye on Russia,” Business Insider, January 15, 2020; Hank Davis, “WATCH: Marines, Navy ‘Take’ Adak Island as Part of Arctic Training,” KTUU.com, September 20, 2019; Thomas Nilsen, “B-2 Stealth Bomber on Mission above Arctic Circle outside Norway,” Barents Observer. September 6, 2019; Lolita C. Baldor, “US Steps Up Winter-Warfare Training As Global Threat Shifts,” Associated Press, February 20, 2019; April Davis, “Soldiers Learn Arctic Survival from Northern Neighbors,” U.S. Army, February 7, 2019; Heather Wilson, “Air Power and the Arctic: The Importance of Projecting Strength in the North,” Defense News, January 9, 2019. 167 See, for example, Peter Bakkemo Danilov, “Cold Response 2020 Exercise is On,” Barents Observer, March 10, 2020; Thomas Nilsen, “Winter Exercise Underway in Northern Finland with Soldiers from Seven Nations,” Barents Observer, March 8, 2020; Atle Staalesen, “Freezing Cold As 16,000 NATO Soldiers Kickstart Arctic War Game,” Barents Observer, March 2, 2020; Atle Staalesen, “Looming Threats Across Northern Scandinavia Trigger a Norwegian Rearmament,” Barents Observer, January 22, 2020; “1,000 Royal Marines On Largest Arctic Deployment In ‘Many Years,’” Forces Network, January 17, 2020; Nikolaj Skydsgaard, “Danish PM Suggests Increasing Arctic Surveillance in Response to Russian Activity,” Reuters, December 3, 2019; Kevin McGwin, “Denmark Will Triple Arctic Defense Spending,” Arctic Today, December 3, 2019; Gerard O’Dwyer, “Nordic Countries See Russia Flex Its Missile Muscles,” Defense News, August 5, 2019. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 48 DOD in General January 2018 National Defense Strategy The January 2018 unclassified summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy168 does not specifically mention the Arctic. June 2019 DOD Arctic Strategy DOD’s June 2019 Arctic Strategy—the successor to DOD’s 2013 and 2016 Arctic strategies—states This document articulates the Department of Defense’s (DoD) strategy for the Arctic region in an era of strategic competition. It is informed by the 2017 National Security Strategy and anchored in the priorities of the 2018 National Defense Strategy (NDS) and its focus on competition with China and Russia as the principal challenge to long-term U.S. security and prosperity. This strategy supersedes the 2016 DoD Arctic strategy. DoD’s desired end-state for the Arctic is a secure and stable region where U.S. national interests are safeguarded, the U.S. homeland is defended, and nations work cooperatively to address shared challenges. This strategy sets forth DoD’s assessment of the Arctic security environment, risks posed to U.S. national security interests, DoD Arctic objectives, and the strategic approach by which DoD will achieve these objectives. A secure and stable Arctic region benefits the United States and necessitates a rules-based order, reflecting Arctic nations’ respect for national sovereignty and constructive engagement to address shared challenges. The network of U.S. allies and partners with shared national interests in this rules-based order is the United States’ greatest strategic advantage in the Arctic region, and thus the cornerstone of DoD’s Arctic strategy. DoD cooperation with Arctic allies and partners strengthens our shared approach to regional security and helps deter strategic competitors from seeking to unilaterally change the existing rules-based order. NDS goals and priorities guide DoD’s strategic approach to the Arctic. The Joint Force must be able to deter, and if necessary, defeat great power aggression. DoD must prioritize efforts to address the central problem the NDS identifies – i.e., the Joint Force’s eroding competitive edge against China and Russia, and the NDS imperative to ensure favorable regional balances of power in the Indo-Pacific and Europe. Developing a more lethal, resilient, agile, and ready Joint Force will ensure that our military sustains its competitive advantages, not only for these key regions of strategic competition, but globally as well. Maintaining a credible deterrent for the Arctic region requires DoD to understand and shape the Arctic’s geo-strategic landscape for future operations and to respond effectively to contingencies in the Arctic region, both independently and in cooperation with others. DoD’s strategic approach seeks to do so by implementing three ways in support of the desired Arctic end-state (each described in detail in this document): • Building Arctic awareness; • Enhancing Arctic operations; and • Strengthening the rules-based order in the Arctic.169 168 Department of Defense, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America: Sharpening the American Military’s Competitive Edge, January 2018, 11 pp. 169 Department of Defense, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, Report to Congress, Department of Defense Arctic Strategy, As required by Section 1071 of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 49 March 2020 DOD Testimony DOD testified in March 2020 that The Arctic is a potential avenue for expanded great power competition and aggression, since it is located between the two key NDS [National Defense Strategy] regions (the Indo-Pacific and Europe) and the U.S. homeland. The Arctic is a region through which the United States may project power to advance favorable balances of power in these key regions…. The Department, both independently and in cooperation with allies and partners, is taking steps to enhance the Joint Force’s ability to operate in the Arctic and project power through and beyond the region. For example, we are pursuing enhanced domain awareness, regular exercises and training, interoperable supporting infrastructure, and extreme cold weather resilience with allies and partners. Of special note, our cooperation with Canada through the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD), a long-standing bi-national organization, is vital for homeland defense. More broadly, our network of allies and partners is the cornerstone of the Department’s approach to the Arctic region and represents a strategic advantage for the United States, which China and Russia do not possess. Six of the seven other Arctic nations are either NATO Allies or are NATO Enhanced Opportunities Partners. Our allies and partners are highly capable and proficient in the Arctic region’s operating conditions, and they share the United States’ interest in maintaining and strengthening the international rules-based order – including in the Arctic. Defense cooperation with allies and partners complements broader U.S. Government cooperation in other forums, such as the Arctic Council (which excludes matters related to military and security from its mandate).… The Department assesses global posture needs based on strategic priorities, the Joint Force’s operational capability needs, and other factors. The Department balances the mission demands of a particular region like the Arctic against other global demands, in a manner consistent with the NDS. In accordance with DoD’s Arctic Strategy, and consistent with Section 1752 of the National Defense Authorization Act for FY 2020, the Department is assessing infrastructure needs in the Arctic to support operational flexibility and power projection. The Department regularly re-evaluates its capability and infrastructure needs as conditions, opportunities, and risks related to U.S. national security evolve. The Department is reviewing potential strategic port sites in the Arctic within the broader context of NDS priorities.170 For the full text of the above March 2020 DOD testimony, plus the text of additional March 2020 testimony from another DOD witness at the same hearing, see Appendix D. FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act The conference report (H.Rept. 116-333 of December 9, 2019) on S. 1790, the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act, includes a number of provisions relating to the Arctic, including the following: Fiscal Year 2019 (P.L. 115-232), June 2019, p. 2. For press reports regarding the document, see Connie Lee, “Great Power Competition Extends to Arctic,” National Defense Magazine, August 12, 2019; Hal Brands, “America Is Losing the Battle of the Arctic,” Bloomberg, July 30, 2019; Melody Schreiber, “U.S. Arctic Defense Strategy Ramps Up Rhetoric Without Committing Resources, Experts Say,” Arctic Today, June 11, 2019; Malte Humpert, “New U.S. Department of Defense Arctic Strategy Sees Growing Uncertainty and Tension in Region,” High North News, June 7, 2019. 170 Statement for the Record before the Senate Armed Services Committee, Subcommittee on Readiness and Management Support, on U.S. Policy and Posture in Support of Arctic Readiness, March 3, 2020, pp. 2-4. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 50  Section 1238, which requires a report on Russian and Chinese military activities in the Arctic;  Section 1260E, which requires an independent study on Chinese foreign direct investment in the Arctic countries;  Section 1706, which requires a report on DOD’s plans for mass-casualty disaster response operations in the Arctic; and  Section 1752, which requires a report evaluating potential sites for one or more strategic ports in the Arctic, and authorizes the Secretary of Defense to designate one or more ports in the Arctic as DOD strategic Arctic ports. Navy and Coast Guard in General The Navy and Coast Guard are addressing the potential implications of increased human activities in the Arctic for the Navy and Coast Guard, particularly implications for required numbers of ships and aircraft, ship and aircraft characteristics, ship and aircraft operations, new or enlarged Arctic bases, and supporting systems, such as navigation and communication systems. The Coast Guard annually deploys cutters and aircraft into the region to perform missions and better understand the implications of operating such units there, and the Navy has recently deployed some surface ships to the region.171 Key points relating to the Navy and Coast Guard in the Arctic include the following:  The diminishment of Arctic ice is creating new operating areas in the Arctic for Navy surface ships and Coast Guard cutters.  U.S. national security interests in the Arctic include “such matters as missile defense and early warning; deployment of sea and air systems for strategic sealift, strategic deterrence, maritime presence, and maritime security operations; and ensuring freedom of navigation and overflight.”172  In a context of renewed great power competition, discussions of the Arctic have begun to focus more on security issues, and on countering Russian and Chinese activities in the region. Some Members of Congress, in addition to urging DOD to establish a new strategic port in the Arctic, have urged the Navy to bolster its plans for sending surface ships into Arctic waters as part of a broader U.S. effort to counter substantial Russian and growing Chinese activities in the region. Russia’s and China’s investments in building and operating polar icebreakers 171 See, for example, Christopher Woody, “The US Navy Is Learning How to Operate in the Arctic, and More Ships May Not Be the Answer,” Business Insider, February 7, 2020; Zachariah Hughes, “As Polar Ice Cap Recedes, The U.S. Navy Looks North,” NPR, June 12, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “Theodore Roosevelt Strike Group in Alaska for High-End, Joint Exercise Northern Edge 2019,” USNI News, May 14, 2019; Liz Ruskin, “Navy Plans to Be More Active in the Arctic,” Alaska Public Media, May 2, 2019; Ben Kesling, “U.S. Navy Plans to Extend Its Reach in the Arctic,” Wall Street Journal, May 1, 2019; Malte Humpert, “U.S. navy Plans to Send Surface Vessels Through Arctic,” High North News, March 11, 2019; Ben Kesling, “Cold War Games: U.S. Is Preparing to Test the Waters in Icy Arctic,” Wall Street Journal, January 11, 2019; Yereth Rosen, US Coast Guard Settles into Kotzebue for the Summer,” Arctic Today, July 2, 2018; David Axe, “Three U.S. and British Submarines Meet at the North Pole,” War Is Boring, March 22, 2018; Kris Osborn, “The Navy Is Training for War with Russia in the Arctic,” National Interest, March 20, 2018; Corey B. Barker, “Arctic-Deployed Navy Submarines Participate in Ice Exercise 2018,” Defense.gov, March 13, 2018; Elizabeth McLaughlin, “Regular US Navy Arctic Submarine Exercise Takes On New Importance,” ABC News, March 12, 2018; Submarine Force Pacific, “Navy’s Arctic Ice Exercise Features Multinational Participation,” Defense.gov, March 8, 2018. 172 NSPD 66/HSPD 25, Section III B. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 51 have become more prominent in discussions about procuring new polar icebreakers for the Coast Guard.  SAR in the Arctic is a mission of increasing importance, particularly for the Coast Guard, and one that poses potentially significant operational challenges (see “Search and Rescue (SAR)” above).  More complete and detailed information on the Arctic is needed to more properly support expanded Navy and Coast Guard ship and aircraft operations in the Arctic.  The Navy and the Coast Guard currently have limited infrastructure in place in the Arctic to support expanded ship and aircraft operations in the Arctic.173  Expanded ship and aircraft operations in the Arctic may require altering ship and aircraft designs and operating methods.174  Cooperation with other Arctic countries will be valuable in achieving defense and homeland security goals. Navy January 2019 Navy Strategic Outlook for the Arctic The Navy in recent years has issued a series of strategy and roadmap documents for the Arctic. The latest of these is a January 2019 strategic outlook for the Arctic document, which states The Navy will defend the United States from attack and preserve the Nation’s strategic influence in the Arctic. Naval forces will operate to deter aggression and enable peaceful resolution of crises on terms acceptable to the U.S. and its allies and partners…. In support of National and Department of Defense objectives for the Arctic, the Navy will pursue the following strategic objectives: • Defend U.S. sovereignty and the homeland from attack; • Ensure the Arctic remains a stable, conflict-free region; • Preserve Freedom of the Seas; and • Promote partnerships within the U.S. Government and with allies and partners to achieve the above objectives…. While there are recognized threats, opportunities, and risks in our return to an era of Great Power Competition, the Arctic is assessed to be low risk for conflict because nations have demonstrated the ability to resolve differences peacefully. Within the Arctic Ocean, nations exercise rights and freedoms consistent with international law, such as navigation and overflight, marine scientific research, the laying and maintenance of undersea pipelines and cables, and fishing. Nations respect the exclusive rights and jurisdiction of Arctic coastal states for exploitation of resources in the EEZ and continental shelf. It remains unlikely that any of the eight Arctic states would risk a large-scale conflict; however, the Navy will be prepared to deter conflict and protect our national interests…. 173 See, for example, Geoff Ziezulewicz, “Welcome to the Arctic: Degraded Radios, Poor Satellite Geometry and Sea Charts Dating Back to Capt. Cook,” Navy Times, September 19, 2019. 174 See, for example, Ben Werner, “Arleigh Burke Destroyers Are More Viable Option for Near-Term Navy Presence in Arctic,” USNI News, September 18, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “CNO: Arctic Operations Limited Now, But Future Ship designs Should Consider Environment,” USNI News, September 12, 2016. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 52 Though the United States has not acceded to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), the U.S. Navy has long treated its provisions related to traditional ocean uses as customary international law. The customary international law principles reflected in UNCLOS serve as the legal framework for rights and obligations in the Arctic Ocean including the delineation of the outer limits of the continental shelf, protection of the marine environment, freedom of navigation, military survey, and marine scientific research…. The Navy and U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) collaborate in close partnership during times of war and peace to protect our nation’s ports and waterways and to promote U.S. maritime security interests overseas. The combined efforts of the Navy and the Coast Guard in the Arctic Ocean demonstrate a cooperative relationship that acknowledges the distinctive authorities, missions, competencies, and cultures of each service. The Coast Guard has statutory responsibilities, and fulfills most U.S. maritime missions in the Arctic…. The Navy will work with the Royal Canadian Navy to ensure common Arctic Region interests are addressed in a complementary manner. For decades, Canada and the United States have been partners in the defense of North America, cooperating within the framework of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD)…. As the Arctic Ocean continues to become more accessible, the importance of the Bering Strait as a strategic chokepoint will increase…. The Greenland, Iceland, United Kingdom-Norwegian (GIUK-N) Gap is a strategic corridor for naval operations in the high north…. The Northern Sea Route and the Northwest Passage are two recognized Arctic Ocean routes for connecting the Pacific to the Atlantic, and are ice covered the majority of the year. Seasonal ice cover varies along the length of the transit, though the exact location and duration remains difficult to predict. The Navy will consider implications of increasing maritime traffic [along these two routes] in future security planning…. Navy prioritization of leadership and resources on core functions in regions of likely conflict will continue to override competing interests to develop capabilities in peaceful regions such as the Arctic…. In alignment with higher-level guidance, and considering the context described above, the Navy strategic objectives for the Arctic are: Defend U.S. sovereignty and the homeland from attack.… New opportunities and security challenges in the Arctic may emerge as conditions in the region change.… The Navy will ensure it remains prepared to operate in the Arctic to counter any threats to the homeland that may arise. Ensure the Arctic remains a stable, conflict-free region…. While Arctic and non-Arctic states have thus far demonstrated a commitment to a stable and conflict-free region, Navy presence in cooperation with international partners will encourage all nations to act responsibly and in accordance with the rights and freedoms provided in international law. Preserve Freedom of the Seas. Access to the global commons and freedom of the seas are national priorities. U.S. policy since 1983 provides that the U.S. will exercise and assert its navigation and overflight rights and freedoms on a worldwide basis in a manner consistent with the balance of U.S. interests as reflected in UNCLOS…. DoD’s FON [Freedom of Navigation] Program employs every branch of military service, including the U.S. Coast Guard. In the Arctic, Navy submarines can conduct FONOPS, either undersea or by surfacing, and Navy surface combatants could conduct FONOPS in open water conditions during the summer melt season…. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 53 Promote partnerships within the U.S. Government and with allies and partners to achieve the above objectives. Today’s great power competition requires both a renewed focus on the Navy’s role as part of the Joint Force and a rededication to engagement. The Navy will engage [in the Arctic] with allies and partners, in order to protect the American homeland, maintain maritime superiority in key maritime regions, and promote U.S. interests globally. The Navy will collaborate with interagency and international partners and allies to improve all-domain awareness, information sharing, and communications [in the Arctic] through participation in training, operations, and exercises. The Navy’s submarine fleet has decades of experience performing missions and exercises under the sea ice…. The Navy continues to make investments in its global operational modeling capability to improve the ability to protect operational forces, installations, and equipment from hazardous conditions of the physical environment. The Navy collaborates with NOAA, DOE, NASA, NSF, and the U.S. Air Force to improve Arctic modeling and forecasting capabilities…. The Navy will continue to play a significant leadership role in the Arctic. Through its global reach capability and worldwide command and control, Navy leadership will support joint and interagency efforts, enhance information sharing, and promote interoperability…. The Arctic provides additional maneuver room for distributed nuclear and conventional forces to operate in support of deterrence…. The Navy will be ready to exercise Sea Control in order to defend United States’ maritime access and interests in the Arctic…. The Arctic enables power projection from vectors [i.e., geographic points of origin] [that are] in addition to [those made possible by] traditional operating areas…. Maritime security in the Arctic includes defending sea lines of communication and the homeland from seaborne attacks, maritime domain awareness, and supporting Coast Guard operations as required…. The Navy will continue to evaluate the requirements and priorities associated with the rapid movement of personnel, materiel, and forces to and from or within the Arctic by sea to provide timely movement, positioning, and sustainment of the Joint Force across the range of military operations…. The Navy will provide support as required to search and rescue missions [in the Arctic] conducted and led by the Coast Guard and as directed in support of international partners…. The Navy will remain ready to support missions [in the Arctic] such as pollution response or natural disaster recovery; integrated planning efforts with local, state, federal, and native communities; and interoperability with the Coast Guard and international partners. Mitigating navigation hazards and chemical spills in the Arctic operational environment requires specialized equipment and tactics, techniques and procedures. … The Navy will continually assess its preparedness and make informed decisions on Arctic operations and planning in response to changes in the Arctic operational environment or changes in its strategic context. As changes to threats, opportunities, and risks in the Arctic security environment may occur, they will be viewed in balance with the global nature of Great Power Competition.175 175 U.S. Navy, Strategic Outlook for the Arctic, January 2019, pp. 4-13. For a press report about the strategy, see Melody Schreiber, “As Climate Changes, US Admirals See Increasing Need for Arctic Presence, Arctic Today, May 21, 2019. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 54 Reestablishment of 2nd Fleet for North Atlantic and Arctic In May 2018, the Navy announced that it would reestablish the 2nd Fleet, which was the Navy’s fleet during the Cold War for countering Soviet naval forces in the North Atlantic. The fleet’s formal reestablishment occurred in August 2018. The 2nd Fleet was created in 1950 and disestablished in September 2011. In its newly reestablished form, it is described as focusing on countering Russian naval forces not only in the North Atlantic but in the Arctic as well.176 Upcoming Freedom of Navigation (FON) Operation in Arctic In January 2019, the Navy announced that “in coming months” it will send a Navy warship through Arctic waters on a freedom of navigation (FON) operation to assert U.S. navigational rights under international law in Arctic waters. The U.S. government’s FON program was established in 1979 and annually includes multiple U.S. Navy FON operations conducted in various parts of the world.177 The upcoming FON operation in the Arctic, however, will reportedly be the Navy’s first ever FON operation in the Arctic.178 Coast Guard April 2019 Coast Guard Arctic Strategic Outlook The Coast Guard, like the Navy, has released a series of Arctic-related studies and strategy documents in recent years. In April 2019, the Coast Guard released a new Arctic strategic outlook document as the successor to its previous 2013 Arctic strategy document. The April 2019 strategic outlook document states The United States is an Arctic Nation, and the United States Coast Guard has served as the lead federal agency for homeland security, safety, and environmental stewardship in the Arctic region for over 150 years. Since Revenue Cutters first sailed to Alaska in 1867 to establish U.S. sovereignty, the Service’s role has expanded, including representing American interests as a leader in the international bodies governing navigation, search and rescue, vessel safety, fisheries enforcement, and pollution response across the entire Arctic. As the region continues to open and strategic competition drives more actors to look to the Arctic for economic and geopolitical advantages, the demand for Coast Guard leadership and presence will continue to grow. Since the release of the Coast Guard Arctic Strategy in 2013, the resurgence of nation-state competition has coincided with dramatic changes in the physical environment of the Arctic, which has elevated the region’s prominence as a strategically competitive space. America’s 176 See, for example, Christopher Woody, “The US Navy’s Newest Fleet Is Bulking Up for ‘Leaner, Agile’ Operations to Counter Russia in the Atlantic and the Arctic,” Business Insider, January 18, 2019; Patricia Kime, “The Navy Isd gearing Up for ‘Leaner, Agile’ Operations in Arctic, North Atlantic,” Military.com, January 16, 2019; Rich Abott, “2nd Fleet To Be Fully Operational in 2019, Sees Real Russian Threat,” Defense Daily, December 3, 2018; Sam LaGrone, “U.S. 2nd Fleet Racing Toward a 2019 Operational Capability,” USNI News, November 29, 2018; Paul McLeary, “New Second Fleet To Stay Lean, Unpredictable, Commander Says; & Watching China,” Breaking Defense, November 29, 2018; Sam LaGrone, “CNO: New 2nd Fleet Boundary Will Extend North to the Edge of Russian Waters,” USNI News, August 24, 2018. 177 For background information on the FON program, see the section entitled “Freedom of Navigation (FON) Program” in CRS Report R42784, U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas: Background and Issues for Congress. 178 See Ben Kesling, “Cold War Games: U.S. Is Preparing to Test the Waters in Icy Arctic,” Wall Street Journal, January 11, 2019; Samuel Osborne, “US Navy to Sail Warship Through Arctic Waters in Show of Strength to Russia and China,” Independent (UK), January 14, 2019. See also Megan Eckstein “Navy May Deploy Surface Ships to Arctic This Summer as Shipping Lanes Open Up,” USNI News, January 8, 2019. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 55 two nearest-peer powers, Russia and China, have both declared the region a national priority and made corresponding investments in capability and capacity to expand their influence in the region. Russia and China’s persistent challenges to the rules-based international order around the globe cause concern of similar infringement to the continued peaceful stability of the Arctic region. As the only U.S. Service that combines both military and civil authorities, the Coast Guard is uniquely suited to address the interjurisdictional challenges of today’s strategic environment by modeling acceptable behavior, building regional capacity, and strengthening organizations that foster transparency and good governance across the Arctic. The Arctic’s role in geostrategic competition is growing, in large part because reductions in permanent sea ice have exposed coastal borders and facilitated increased human and economic activity. The warming of the Arctic has led to longer and larger windows of reduced ice conditions. From 2006 to 2018, satellite imagery observed the 12 lowest Arctic ice extents on record. This has led to greater access through Arctic shipping routes. While the near-term future of these routes is uncertain, a polar route has the potential to reduce transit times of traditional shipping routes by up to two weeks. Russia’s establishment of a Northern Sea Route Administration, along with the use of high ice-class Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) tankers built specifically to export natural gas from its Yamal LNG facility, have contributed significantly to the increase in commercial shipping traffic in the Arctic. In addition, opportunities for potential resource extraction and expanding Arctic tourism offer new prospects for some of the Nation’s most isolated communities and broader benefits to America. However, changing terrain and subsistence food patterns, as well as the impacts of increasingly frequent and intense winter storms, continue to challenge the communities and increase risk in the maritime domain. The Coast Guard will adhere to the following principles as it manages these risks and seizes the opportunities created by these changes: Partnership. The Arctic is an exceptional place that demands collaboration across national boundaries. The Coast Guard will partner with the Arctic Nations, as well as partners and allies with Arctic interests, to contribute to keeping the Arctic a conflict-free region. The Service will continue to dedicate resources to forums, such as the Arctic Council, and to combined operations and exercises to safeguard and secure the Arctic domain. The unique and valuable relationship the Coast Guard has established with tribal entities builds mutual trust and improves mission capacity and readiness. We will continue to incorporate lessons-learned from engagements with Alaska Native communities, as well as industry and other Arctic residents, in the development and implementation of policy and strategy. Unity of Effort. The Coast Guard will advance the Nation’s strategic goals and priorities in the Arctic and exercise leadership across the Arctic community of federal, state, and local agencies. As a military Service, the Coast Guard will strengthen interoperability with the Department of Defense and complement the capabilities of the other military services to support the National Security Strategy and the National Military Strategy. A Culture of Continuous Innovation. The Coast Guard cannot meet the challenges of tomorrow’s Arctic with today’s paradigms. Rapid technological advancements within the maritime industry, combined with robust investments by strategic competitors, have raised the stakes. The Service must take this opportunity to leverage transformative technology and lead the employment of innovative policies to solve complex problems. While the strategic context has changed, Coast Guard missions in the Arctic are enduring. The Coast Guard will protect the Nation’s vital interests by upholding the rules-based order in the maritime domain while cooperating to reduce conflict and risk. We will help safeguard the Nation’s Arctic communities, environment, and economy. The Service will pursue these ends through three complementary lines of effort: Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 56 Line of Effort 1: Enhance Capability to Operate Effectively in a Dynamic Arctic In order to prosecute its missions in the Arctic, the Coast Guard must fully understand and operate freely in this vast and unforgiving environment. Effective capability requires sufficient heavy icebreaking vessels, reliable high-latitude communications, and comprehensive Maritime Domain Awareness. In order to respond to crises in the Arctic, our Nation must also muster adequate personnel, aviation, and logistics resources in the region. The Coast Guard is the sole provider and operator of the U.S. polar capable fleet but currently does not have the capability or capacity to assure access in the high latitudes. Closing the gap requires persistent investment in capabilities and capacity for polar operations, including the Polar Security Cutter. The Coast Guard will pursue this line of effort through three sub-objectives. • Fill Gaps in the Coast Guard’s Arctic Operational Capability and Capacity • Establish Persistent Awareness and Understanding of the Arctic Domain • Close the Critical Communications Gap in the Arctic Line of Effort 2: Strengthen the Rules-Based Order Actions by strategic competitors will challenge the long-standing norms that have made the Arctic an area of peace and low tension. The institutions contributing to a conflict-free Arctic will face new challenges requiring active and committed American leadership. The Coast Guard is uniquely positioned to provide this leadership in the maritime domain. The Coast Guard is dedicated to strengthening institutions–such as the Arctic Council, the Arctic Coast Guard Forum (ACGF), and the International Maritime Organization (IMO)–and partnerships which reinforce the rules-based order and foster transparency. Rules and norms endure when nations demonstrate a commitment to upholding them. Working closely with allies and partners, the Coast Guard will deter threats to international maritime norms and America’s national interests by conducting operations and exercises along the full spectrum of competition. Working in partnership with the Department of Defense, the Coast Guard will continue to support to the Nation’s defense priorities in the Arctic. The Coast Guard will work closely with joint and international partners to build capability and demonstrate resolve in the Arctic. The Coast Guard will pursue this line of effort through two sub-objectives. • Strengthen Partnerships and Lead International Forums • Counter Challenges to the International Rules-Based Order in the Maritime Domain Line of Effort 3: Innovate and Adapt to Promote Resilience and Prosperity The tyranny of distance and the harsh Arctic climate pose significant challenges to agencies charged with providing maritime safety and security to all Americans, including the hundreds of villages and thousands of seasonal workers in the U.S. Arctic. Search and rescue, law enforcement, marine safety, waterways management, and other Coast Guard missions are complicated by the Arctic’s dynamic and remote operating environment. The Coast Guard will collaborate with stakeholders to develop new practices and technology to serve the maritime community and manage risk in the region. As the Nation’s maritime first responder, the Coast Guard will lead and participate in planning and exercises that include federal, state, tribal, local, international, non-governmental and industry partners to test preparedness and adaptability. During a crisis in the Arctic’s maritime domain, the Service will lead an effective, unified response. The Coast Guard will pursue this line of effort through three sub-objectives. • Support Regional Resilience and Lead in Crisis Response • Address Emerging Demands in the Maritime Law Enforcement Mission Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 57 • Advance and Modernize the Arctic Marine Transportation System Conclusion. Increased accessibility and activity will create more demand for Coast Guard services in the Arctic maritime domain. While long-term trends point to a more consistently navigable and competitive region, other environmental and economic factors make it difficult to predict the scope and pace of change. Near-term variability in the physical environment exposes mariners and communities to unpredictable levels of risk. As the region attracts increasing attention from both partner and competitor states, America’s economic and security interests will become even more closely tied to the Arctic. Each development is significant on its own, but in combination, these trends create a new risk landscape for the Nation and the Coast Guard. This updated strategic outlook reflects a recognition of these realities and outlines the Service’s lines of effort to succeed in the new Arctic.179 February 2020 Coast Guard Testimony In February 2020, the Coast testified that The Coast Guard has been operating in the Arctic Ocean since 1867, when the United States purchased Alaska from Russia. Since that time, the state of affairs in the Arctic has evolved significantly. The ice is receding; storms are increasing in frequency and magnitude; the coast is eroding; and permafrost is thawing. Alaskan residents are striving to evolve their resiliency and to sustain their culture and way of life while residents and non-residents alike are pursuing emerging opportunities. For the Coast Guard, the demand signal for our services is expanding along with the operational environment, exacerbating the tyranny of distance of the region. The types of commercial activity are morphing, from oil and gas exploration a few years ago to the recent surge in cruise ship activity and expanding environmental tourism. These rapid changes in types and location of activity, along with the changes in the physical environment, magnify the challenges in executing the Service’s mission to advance safety, security, sovereign rights, and stewardship across the Arctic. Simultaneously, the geopolitical environment is rapidly changing as state and non-state actors seek to advance their own interests in the Arctic. Allies, partners, and competitors alike increasingly compete for diplomatic, economic, and strategic advantage. The National Defense Strategy describes a world no longer at either peace or war but rather one of enduring great power competition. Shaping and influencing this competition continuum requires a mixture of diplomatic, informational, military, economic, financial, intelligence, and law enforcement efforts to achieve and sustain national strategic objectives. As the only U.S. Armed Force with both military and law enforcement authorities, combined with membership in the intelligence community, the Coast Guard seamlessly bridges the layers across this continuum. Specifically, the Coast Guard’s constabulary function and broad authorities serve as a critical bridge between the hard-power lethality of the Defense Department and soft-power diplomacy of the State Department. This strategic versatility is well suited for operating in ambiguous environments. This makes the Coast Guard a unique agency to cultivate strong 179 Coast Guard, Arctic Strategic Outlook, April 2019, Executive Summary (pp. 4-7). For press reports about the strategy, see, for example, Ragnhild Grønning, “Strategic Competition in Focus in US Coast Guard Arctic Strategy,” High North News, May 2, 2019; Dermot Cole, “The Coast Guard’s New Arctic Strategic Vision Downplays a Big Problem: Budget Constraints,” Arctic Today, April 29, 2019; Kyle Rempfer, “Great Powers on Ice: Coast Guard Drops Arctic Manifesto,” Military Times, April 25, 2019; Dan Lamothe, “New Coast Guard Strategy for the Arctic Calls for ‘Projecting Sovereignty’ to Contest China and Russia,” Washington Post, April 22, 2019. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 58 international relationships and build a coalition of Arctic partners based on mutual interests and values that strengthen regional stability and enhance prosperity across the region.180 For the text of this testimony, see Appendix D. Polar Icebreaking181 Polar Icebreaker Operations Within the U.S. government, the Coast Guard is the U.S. agency responsible for polar icebreaking. U.S. polar ice operations conducted in large part by the Coast Guard’s polar icebreakers support 9 of the Coast Guard’s 11 statutory missions.182 The roles of U.S. polar icebreakers can be summarized as follows:  conducting and supporting scientific research in the Arctic and Antarctic;  defending U.S. sovereignty in the Arctic by helping to maintain a U.S. presence in U.S. territorial waters in the region;  defending other U.S. interests in polar regions, including economic interests in waters that are within the U.S. exclusive economic zone (EEZ) north of Alaska;  monitoring sea traffic in the Arctic, including ships bound for the United States; and  conducting other typical Coast Guard missions (such as search and rescue, law enforcement, and protection of marine resources) in Arctic waters, including U.S. territorial waters north of Alaska.183 The Coast Guard’s large icebreakers are called polar icebreakers rather than Arctic icebreakers because they perform missions in both the Arctic and Antarctic. Operations to support National Science Foundation (NSF) research activities in both polar regions account for a significant portion of U.S. polar icebreaker operations. Providing support for NSF’s research in the Antarctic focuses on performing an annual mission, called Operation Deep Freeze (ODF), to break through Antarctic sea ice so as to reach and resupply McMurdo Station, the large U.S. Antarctic research station located on the shore of McMurdo Sound, near the Ross Ice Shelf. The Coast Guard states that Polar Star, the Coast Guard’s only currently operational heavy polar icebreaker, “spends the [northern hemisphere] winter [i.e., the southern hemisphere summer] breaking ice near Antarctica in order to refuel and 180 Testimony of Admiral Charles W. Ray, Coast Guard Vice Commandant, on “Arctic Security Issues” before the House Homeland Security Subcommittee on Transportation & Maritime Security, February 5, 2020, pp. 1-2. 181 This section prepared by Ronald O’Rourke, Specialist in Naval Affairs, Foreign Affairs, Defense, and Trade Division. For more on the Coast Guard’s polar icebreakers, see CRS Report RL34391, Coast Guard Polar Security Cutter (Polar Icebreaker) Program: Background and Issues for Congress. 182 The nine missions supported by polar ice operations are search and rescue; maritime safety; aids to navigation; ice operations; marine environmental protection; living marine resources; other law enforcement (protect the exclusive economic zone [EEZ]); ports, waterways and costal security; and defense readiness. The two missions not supported by polar ice operations are illegal drug interdiction and undocumented migrant interdiction. (Department of Homeland Security, Polar Icebreaking Recapitalization Project Mission Need Statement, Version 1.0, approved by DHS June 28, 2013, p. 10.) 183 This passage, beginning with “The roles of …,” originated in an earlier iteration of this CRS report and was later transferred by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) with minor changes to Government Accountability Office, Coast Guard[:]Efforts to Identify Arctic Requirements Are Ongoing, but More Communication about Agency Planning Efforts Would Be Beneficial, GAO-10-870, September 2010, p. 53. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 59 resupply McMurdo Station. When the mission is complete, the Polar Star returns to dry dock [in Seattle] in order to complete critical maintenance and prepare it for the next ODF mission. Once out of dry dock, it’s back to Antarctica, and the cycle repeats itself.”184 In terms of the maximum thickness of the ice to be broken, the annual McMurdo resupply mission generally poses the greatest icebreaking challenge for U.S. polar icebreakers, though Arctic ice can frequently pose its own significant icebreaking challenges for U.S. polar icebreakers. The Coast Guard’s medium polar icebreaker, Healy, spends most of its operational time in the Arctic supporting NSF research activities and performing other operations. Although polar ice is diminishing due to climate change, observers generally expect that this development will not eliminate the need for U.S. polar icebreakers, and in some respects might increase mission demands for them. Even with the diminishment of polar ice, there are still significant ice-covered areas in the polar regions, and diminishment of polar ice could lead in coming years to increased commercial cargo ship, cruise ship, research ship, and naval surface ship operations, as well as increased exploration for oil and other resources, in the Arctic—activities that could require increased levels of support from polar icebreakers, particularly since waters described as “ice free” can actually still have some amount of ice.185 Changing ice conditions in Antarctic waters have made the McMurdo resupply mission more challenging since 2000.186 Current Polar Icebreaker Fleet The operational U.S. polar icebreaking fleet currently consists of one heavy polar icebreaker, Polar Star, and one medium polar icebreaker, Healy. In addition to Polar Star, the Coast Guard has a second heavy polar icebreaker, Polar Sea. Polar Sea, however, suffered an engine casualty in June 2010 and has been nonoperational since then. Polar Star and Polar Sea entered service in 1976 and 1978, respectively, and are now well beyond their originally intended 30-year service lives. The Coast Guard has used Polar Sea as a source of spare parts for keeping Polar Star operational. Polar Security Cutter (PSC) Program A Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Mission Need Statement (MNS) approved in June 2013 states that “current requirements and future projections ... indicate the Coast Guard will need to expand its icebreaking capacity, potentially requiring a fleet of up to six icebreakers (3 heavy and 3 medium) to adequately meet mission demands in the high latitudes.... ”187 The Coast Guard in its FY2013 budget initiated a program to acquire three new heavy polar icebreakers, to be followed years from now by the acquisition of up to three new medium polar icebreakers. The program was originally referred to as the polar icebreaker program but is now referred to as the Polar Security Cutter (PSC) program. 184 NyxoLyno Cangemi, “Coast Guard Icebreaker Crew Completes Second Arctic Mission; U.S. Interests in Arctic Domain Depends [sic] on Fleet Recapitalization,” DVIDS (Defense Visual Information Distribution System), October 19, 2018. 185 For more on changes in the Arctic due to diminishment of Arctic ice, see CRS Report R41153, Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress. 186 National Research Council, Polar Icebreakers in a Changing World, An Assessment of U.S. Needs, Washington, 2007, pp. 6-7, 14, 63. 187 Department of Homeland Security, Polar Icebreaking Recapitalization Project Mission Need Statement, Version 1.0, approved by DHS June 28, 2013, p. 9. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 60 The Coast Guard estimates the total procurement costs of the new three heavy PSCs as $1,039 million (i.e., about $1.0 billion) for the first ship, $792 million for the second ship, and $788 million for the third ship, for a combined estimated cost of $2,619 million (i.e., about $2.6 billion). The first ship will cost more than the other two because it will incorporate design costs for the class and be at the start of the production learning curve for the class. The PSC program has received a total of $1,169.6 million (i.e., about $1.2 billion) in procurement funding through FY2020, including $135 million in FY2020, which was $100 million more than the $35 million that the Coast Guard had requested for FY2020. With the funding it has received through FY2020, the first PSC is now fully funded and the second PSC has received initial funding. The Coast Guard’s proposed FY2021 budget requests $555 million in procurement funding for the PSC program. It also proposes a rescission of $70 million in FY2020 funding that Congress had provided for the procurement of long lead time materials (LLTM) for a 12th National Security Cutter (NSC), with the intent of reprogramming that funding to the PSC program. The Coast Guard states that its proposed FY2021 budget, if approved by Congress, would fully fund the second PSC. Search and Rescue (SAR)188 Overview Increasing sea and air traffic through Arctic waters has increased concerns regarding Arctic-area search and rescue (SAR) capabilities.189 Table 1 presents figures on ship casualties in Arctic Circle waters from 2005 to 2017. As shown in the table, the number of ship casualties in Arctic waters has grown in recent years to an annual total of about 50 to 70, most of which are caused by damage to or failure of ship machinery or the stranding or wrecking or ships. Given the location of current U.S. Coast Guard operating bases, it could take Coast Guard aircraft several hours, and Coast Guard cutters days or even weeks, to reach a ship in distress or a downed aircraft in Arctic waters. The Coast Guard states that “the closest Coast Guard Air Station to the Arctic is located in Kodiak, AK, approximately 820 nautical miles south of Utqiagvik, AK, which is nearly the same distance as from Boston, MA, to Miami, FL.”190 In addition to such long distances, the harsh climate complicates SAR operations in the region. Particular concern has been expressed about cruise ships carrying large numbers of civilian passengers that may experience problems and need assistance.191 There have already been incidents of this kind with 188 This section prepared by Ronald O’Rourke, Specialist in Naval Affairs, Foreign Affairs, Defense, and Trade Division. 189 See, for example, Romain Chuffart, “French and Danish Navies Hold Joint SAR Exercises in Greenland’s Waters,” High North News, September 6, 2019; “Arctic Search and Rescue May Face Challenges,” Cruise Industry News, June 27, 2019; Robbie Gramer, “Stretched Thin on Thin Ice; With the Arctic Melting and Norther Coast Guards Struggling to Keep Up, the Next Disaster Is a Matter of When, Not If,” Foreign Policy, September 12, 2018; Edward Struzik, “As Ice Recedes, the Arctic Isn’t Prepared for More Shipping Traffic,” phys.org, September 5, 2018; Derek Minemyer, “Arctic Council Members Say Alaska Needs Search and Rescue in the Arctic, Now,” KTUU, August 16, 2018; Timothy William James Smith, Search and Rescue in the Arctic: Is the U.S. Prepared? RAND Corporation, 2017, 148 pp. (Dissertation report RGSD-382.) 190 Coast Guard, Arctic Strategic Outlook, April 2019, p. 11. 191 See, for example, Jane George, “Exercise Held to Prepare for Arctic Cruise Ship Mishap,” Nunatsiaq News, April 15, 2019; Brian Castner, “How to Rescue a Cruise Ship in the Northwest Passage,” Motherboard (Vice), October 24, 2017; Henry Fountain, “With More Ships in the Arctic, Fears of Disaster Rise,” New York Times, July 23, 2017; Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 61 cruise ships in recent years in waters off Antarctica, and a Russian-flagged passenger ship with 162 people on board ran aground on Canada’s Northwest Passage on August 24, 2018.192 Coast Guard officials have noted the long times that would be needed to respond to potential emergency situations in certain parts the Arctic. The Coast Guard is participating in exercises focused on improving Arctic SAR capabilities.193 Table 1. Ship Casualties in Arctic Circle Waters, 2005-2017 (Ships of 100 gross tons or more) 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Machinery damage/failure 2 3 5 13 14 16 12 13 20 27 46 32 46 Wrecked/ stranded 1 4 10 11 14 9 9 8 10 14 6 11 9 Miscellaneous 0 0 5 1 4 4 2 6 5 5 6 4 6 Collision 0 0 0 1 4 10 4 4 2 0 3 2 4 Fire/explosion 0 0 3 1 2 6 6 1 4 2 4 1 3 Contact (e.g., harbor wall) 0 0 1 1 2 4 1 3 6 4 5 1 1 Hull damage 0 1 3 1 6 2 2 1 2 1 1 2 2 Foundered (i.e., sunk or submerged) 0 0 1 1 2 0 3 1 1 2 0 1 0 Labor dispute 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 Total 3 8 28 30 48 51 39 37 50 55 71 55 71 Sources: For 2005-2007: Allianz Global Corporate & Specialty, Safety and Shipping Review 2015, p. 28. (Table entitled “Arctic Circle Waters—All Casualties including Total Losses 2005–2014.”). For 2008-2017: Allianz Global Corporate & Specialty, Safety and Shipping Review 2018, p. 29. (Table entitled “Arctic Circle Waters—Causes of Casualties (Shipping Incidents) 2008-2017.”) The two tables include similar source notes; the one for the second source states “Source: Lloyd’s List Intelligence Casualty Statistics; Data Analysis & Graphic: Allianz Global Corporate & Specialty.”) Increasing U.S. Coast Guard SAR capabilities for the Arctic could require one or more of the following: enhancing or creating new Coast Guard operating bases in the region; procuring additional Arctic-capable aircraft, cutters, and rescue boats for the Coast Guard; and adding systems to improve Arctic maritime communications, navigation, and domain awareness.194 It Gwladys Fouche, “Uncharted Waters: Mega-Cruise Ships Sail the Arctic,” Reuters, October 10, 2016; Abbie Tingstad and Timothy Smith, “Being Safer in the Arctic,” National Interest, October 3, 2016. 192 Malte Humpert, “A Cruise Ship Runs Aground in Canada’s Arctic Waters; The Akademik Ioffe’s Sister Ship Was Nearby, and Together with Canadian Coast guard Ships, Was Able to Rescue All Passengers,” Arctic Today, August 28, 2018. 193 See, for example, Av Ragnhild Grønning, “Mass Exercise Tests Emergency Response in the Arctic,” High North News, August 219, 2016; Julia Bergman, “Mass Rescue Exercise Tests Response Capabilities in Arctic,” New London Day, August 24, 2016; Wendy Laursen, “Mass Arctic Rescue Exercise Begins,” Maritime Executive, August 24, 2016; Tim Ellis, “Cruise-Ship Evacuation Exercise Begins as Luxury Liner Prepares for Arctic Ocean Transit,” KUAC (alaskapublic.org), August 23, 2016; Bill Colclough, “USCG to Participate with AK Command in Arctic Chinook Exercises,” Alaska Native News, August 23, 2016. 194 For a report assessing certain emergency scenarios in the Arctic, including search and rescue scenarios, see Opening Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 62 may also entail enhanced forms of cooperation with navies and coast guards of other Arctic countries. A 2017 survey of Arctic SAR capabilities conducted as part of the Finnish Border Guard’s Arctic Maritime Safety Cooperation project in cooperation with the Arctic Coast Guard Forum stated the following: The key challenges for Arctic search and rescue identified in this survey include long distances, severe weather, ice and cold conditions, a poor communications network, lack of infrastructure and lack of resource presence in the region. In addition, the capacity to host patients, achieving situational awareness, and unsuitable evacuation and survival equipment pose major challenges for maritime safety and SAR in the Arctic. The Arctic SAR authorities have recognized a need to further develop advanced information sharing between coast guards, emergency authorities, and other stakeholders involved in SAR operations. In addition, joint training and systematic sharing of lessons learned, as well as technological innovation in communications networks and connections, navigation, survival and rescue equipment, and healthcare services are being called for in order to improve SAR capabilities in the Arctic. The survey recommends enhancing practical cooperation between various stakeholders involved in Arctic SAR such as coast guards, rescue centers, other authorities, industry groups, private operators, academia and volunteer organizations. It encourages further information sharing on infrastructure projects and resource assets, Automatic Identification System and weather data, emergency plans and standard operating procedures, as well as exercises and lessons learned via a common database. Furthermore, developing joint courses specifically intended for Arctic SAR and establishing a working group that examines new innovations and technological developments, are recommended as potential initiatives for improving practical international cooperation.195 May 2011 Arctic Council Agreement on Arctic SAR On May 12, 2011, representatives from the member states of the Arctic Council, meeting in Nuuk, Greenland, signed an agreement on cooperation on aeronautical and maritime SAR in the Arctic. Key features of the agreement include the following:  Article 3 and the associated Annex to the agreement essentially divide the Arctic into SAR areas within which each party has primary responsibility for conducting SAR operations, stating that “the delimitation of search and rescue regions is not related to and shall not prejudice the delimitation of any boundary between States or their sovereignty, sovereign rights or jurisdiction,” and that “each Party shall promote the establishment, operation and maintenance of an adequate and effective search and rescue capability within its area.”  Article 4 and the associated Appendix I to the agreement identify the competent authority for each party. For the United States, the competent authority is the Coast Guard. the Arctic Seas, Envisioning Disasters and Framing Solutions, Coastal Response and Research Center, University of New Hampshire, report of January 2009, based on conference held March 18-20, 2008, at Durham, NH. 195 Emmi Ikonen, Arctic Search and Rescue Capabilities Survey: Enhancing International Cooperation 2017, Finnish Border Guard, Arctic Maritime Safety Cooperation (SARC) project, August 2017, p. iv. See also Finnish Red Cross, Red Cross Arctic Disaster Management Study, August 2018, 71 pp. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 63  Article 5 and the associated Appendix II to the agreement identify the agencies responsible for aeronautical and maritime SAR for each party. For the United States, those agencies are the Coast Guard and the Department of Defense.  Article 6 and the associated Appendix III to the agreement identify the aeronautical and/or maritime rescue coordination centers (RCCs) for each party. For the United States, the RCCs are Joint Rescue Coordination Center Juneau (JRCC Juneau) and Aviation Rescue Coordination Center Elmendorf (ARCC Elmendorf).  Article 12 states that “unless otherwise agreed, each Party shall bear its own costs deriving from its implementation of this Agreement,” and that “implementation of this Agreement shall be subject to the availability of relevant resources.”196 Figure 4 shows an illustrative map of the national areas of SAR responsibility based on the geographic coordinates listed in the Annex to the agreement. An October 12, 2015, press report states the following: More people are wishing to explore icy environments, says Peter Hellberg, manager responsible for the SAR process at the Swedish Maritime Administration. Hellberg is part of an IMO/International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) working group that is re-evaluating search and rescue (SAR) operations in Polar waters as a result of this push. The working group includes both a maritime and aeronautical perspective, and it has identified a need for more detailed guidance for SAR organizations which will be achieved through an update of the International Aeronautical and Maritime Search and Rescue Manual (IAMSAR) planned for 2019. While the IAMSAR manual is not mandatory, it is followed by most SAR organizations around the world. It provides the framework for setting up a multi-national SAR, giving different parties guidance on the necessary arrangements for Arctic areas. The guidance will be expanded on based on the Polar Code and other recent IMO regulatory updates, and from an aeronautical perspective, from lessons learned after the disappearance of Malaysian Airlines’ MH370.197 196 Source: Text of final version of agreement made ready for signing and dated April 21, 2011, https://oaarchive.arctic-council.org/bitstream/handle/11374/531/EDOCS-1910-v1-ACMMDK07_Nuuk_2011_Arctic_SAR_Agreement_unsigned_EN.PDF?sequence=8&isAllowed=y. For a State Department fact sheet on the agreement, see “Secretary Clinton Signs the Arctic Search and Rescue Agreement with Other Arctic Nations,” May 12, 2011, accessed October 2, 2015, at https://2009-2017.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2011/05/163285.htm. 197 Wendy Laursen, “MH370, Polar Code Spark SAR Rethink,” Maritime Executive, October 12, 2015. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 64 Figure 4. Illustrative Map of Arctic SAR Areas in Arctic SAR Agreement (Based on geographic coordinates listed in the agreement) Source: “Arctic Search and Rescue Agreement,” accessed July 7, 2011, at http://www.arcticportal.org/features/features-of-2011/arctic-search-and-rescue-agreement. Commercial Sea Transportation198 Background The search for a shorter route from the Atlantic to Asia has been the quest of maritime powers since the Middle Ages. The melting of Arctic ice raises the possibility of saving several thousands of miles and several days of sailing between major trading blocs.199 If the Arctic were to become a viable shipping route, the ramifications could extend far beyond the Arctic. For example, lower shipping costs could be advantageous for China (at least its northeast region), Japan, and South Korea because their manufactured products exported to Europe or North America could become 198 This section prepared by John Frittelli, Specialist in Transportation Policy, Resources, Science, and Industry Division. 199 Extended daylight hours in the Arctic during the summer may also be an advantage. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 65 less expensive relative to other emerging manufacturing centers in Southeast Asia, such as India.200 Melting ice could potentially open up two trans-Arctic routes (see Figure 3):201  The Northern Sea Route (NSR, a.k.a. the “Northeast Passage”), along Russia’s northern border from Murmansk to Provideniya, is about 2,600 nautical miles in length. It was opened by the Soviet Union to domestic shipping in 1931 and to transit by foreign vessels in 1991. This route would be applicable for trade between northeast Asia (north of Singapore) and northern Europe. In recent summers, less than a handful of large, non-Russian-flagged cargo ships have transited the NSR.202 Russia reportedly seeks to reserve carriage of oil and gas extracted along the NSR to Russian-flagged ships.203  The Northwest Passage (NWP) runs through the Canadian Arctic Islands. The NWP actually consists of several potential routes. The southern route is through Peel Sound in Nunavut, which has been open in recent summers and contains mostly one-year ice. However, this route is circuitous, contains some narrow channels, and is shallow enough to impose draft restrictions on ships. The more northern route, through McClure Strait from Baffin Bay to the Beaufort Sea north of Alaska, is much more direct and therefore more appealing to ocean carriers, but more prone to ice blockage.204 The NWP is potentially applicable for trade between northeast Asia (north of Shanghai) and the northeast of North America, but it is less commercially viable than the NSR.205 Cargo ship transits have been extremely rare but cruise vessel excursions and research vessels are more common. Destination Traffic, Not Trans-Arctic Traffic Most cargo ship activity currently taking place in the Arctic is to transport natural resources from the Arctic or to deliver general cargo and supplies to communities and natural resource extraction facilities. Thus, cargo ship traffic in the Arctic presently is mostly regional, not trans-Arctic. While there has been a recent uptick in Arctic shipping activity, this activity has more to do with a spike in commodity prices than it does with the melting of Arctic ice. Even so, fewer ships ply the Arctic seas now than in the past. The NSR continues to account for the bulk of Arctic shipping activity. 200 Presentation by Stephen Carmel, Senior Vice President, Maersk Line Ltd., Halifax International Security Forum, Arctic Security: The New Great Game? November 21, 2009, available at http://fora.tv/. 201 A third but more remote possibility is a route directly over the North Pole. 202 Northern Sea Route Information Office; http://www.arctic-lio.com/. 203 The Independent Barents Observer, “Icebreaking Tankers Have Course for Russia’s New Arctic LNG Plant, And They All Carry Foreign Flags,” December 11, 2017; https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/industry-and-energy/2017/12/icebreaking-tankers-have-course-russias-new-arctic-lng-plant-and-they. 204 This was the route pioneered by the SS Manhattan, an oil tanker modified for ice breaking in 1969 to carry Alaskan North Slope oil to the Atlantic. This was the first commercial passage through the NWP, but the building of the Alaskan pipeline was found to be the more economical means of transporting oil from the North Slope to the lower 48 states. 205 Although the NWP is often compared to the alternative route through the Panama Canal in terms of distance and sailing days from Asia to the U.S. east coast, another alternative to consider is the shorter and faster transcontinental rail route across Canada or the United States. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 66 Unpredictable Ice Conditions Hinder Trans-Arctic Shipping Arctic waters do not necessarily have to be ice free to be open to shipping. Multiyear ice can be over 10 feet thick and problematic even for icebreakers, but one-year ice is typically 3 feet thick or less. This thinner ice can be more readily broken up by icebreakers or ice-class ships (cargo ships with reinforced hulls and other features for navigating in ice-infested waters). However, more open water in the Arctic has resulted in another potential obstacle to shipping: unpredictable ice flows. In the NWP, melting ice and the opening of waters that were once covered with one-year ice has allowed blocks of multiyear ice from farther north and icebergs from Greenland to flow into potential sea lanes. The source of this multiyear ice is not predicted to dissipate in spite of climate change. Moreover, the flow patterns of these ice blocks are very difficult to forecast.206 Thus, the lack of ice in potential sea lanes during the summer months can add even greater unpredictability to Arctic shipping. This is in addition to the extent of ice versus open water, which is also highly variable from one year to the next and seasonally. The unpredictability of ice conditions is a major hindrance for trans-Arctic shipping in general, but can be more of a concern for some types of ships than it is for others. For instance, it would be less of a concern for cruise ships, which may have the objective of merely visiting the Arctic rather than passing through and could change their route and itinerary depending on ice conditions. On the other hand, unpredictability is of the utmost concern for container ships that carry thousands of containers from hundreds of different customers, all of whom expect to unload or load their cargo upon the ship’s arrival at various ports as indicated on the ship’s advertised schedule. The presence of even small blocks of ice or icebergs from a melting Greenland ice sheet requires slow sailing and could play havoc with schedules. Ships carrying a single commodity in bulk from one port to another for just one customer have more flexibility in terms of delivery windows, but would not likely risk an Arctic passage under prevailing conditions. Ice is not the sole impediment to Arctic shipping. The region frequently experiences adverse weather, including not only severe storms, but also intense cold, which can impair deck machinery. During the summer months when sea lanes are open, heavy fog is common in the Arctic. Commercial ships would face higher operating costs on Arctic routes than elsewhere. Ship size is an important factor in reducing freight costs. Many ships currently used in other waters would require two icebreakers to break a path wide enough for them to sail through; ship owners could reduce that cost by using smaller vessels in the Arctic, but this would raise the cost per container or per ton of freight.207 Also, icebreakers or ice-class cargo vessels burn more fuel than ships designed for more temperate waters and would have to sail at slower speeds. The shipping season in the Arctic only lasts for a few weeks, so icebreakers and other special required equipment would sit idle the remainder of the year. None of these impediments by themselves may be enough to discourage Arctic passage but they do raise costs, perhaps enough to negate the savings of a shorter route. Thus, from the perspective of a shipper or a ship owner, shorter via the Arctic does not necessarily mean cheaper and faster.208 206 S.E.L. Howell and J.J. Yackel, “A Vessel Transit Assessment of Sea Ice Variability in the Western Arctic, 1969-2002: Implications for Ship Navigation,” Canadian Journal of Remote Sensing, vol. 30, no. 2, 2004. 207 “Arctic Unlikely to See Major Shipping Growth,” New Zealand Transport and Logistics Business Week, April 24, 2008. 208 Stephen M. Carmel, Senior Vice President, Maersk Line Ltd., “The Cold, Hard Realities of Arctic Shipping,” United States Naval Institute, Proceedings; July 2013, pp. 38-41. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 67 Basic Navigation Infrastructure Is Lacking Considerable investment in navigation-related infrastructure would be required if trans-Arctic shipping were to become a reality. Channel marking buoys and other floating visual aids are not possible in Arctic waters because moving ice sheets will continuously shift their positions. Therefore, vessel captains would need to rely on marine surveys and ice charts. For some areas in the Arctic, however, these surveys and charts are out of date or not sufficiently accurate.209 To remedy this problem, aviation reconnaissance of ice conditions and satellite images would need to become readily available for ship operators.210 Ship-to-shore communication infrastructure would need to be installed where possible. Refueling stations may be needed, as well as, perhaps, transshipment ports where cargo could be transferred to and from ice-capable vessels at both ends of Arctic routes. Shipping lines would need to develop a larger pool of mariners with ice navigation experience. Marine insurers would need to calculate the proper level of risk premium for polar routes, which would require more detailed information about Arctic accidents and incidents in the past. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, along with the state of Alaska, has studied the feasibility of a “deep-draft” port in the Arctic (accommodating ships with a draft of up to 35 feet). The northern and northwestern coastlines of Alaska are exceptionally shallow, generally limiting harbor and near-shore traffic to shallow-draft barges. Coast Guard cutters and icebreakers have drafts of 35 to 40 feet while NOAA research vessels have drafts of 16 to 28 feet, so at present these vessels are based outside the Arctic and must sail considerable distances to reach Arctic duty stations. Supply vessels supporting offshore oil rigs typically have drafts over 20 feet. A deep-draft port could serve as a base of operations for larger vessels, facilitating commercial maritime traffic in the Arctic.211 The study concluded that the existing harbors of Nome or Port Clarence on Alaska’s west coast may be the most suitable for deepening because of their proximity to the Bering Strait and deeper water.212 However, at a July 2016 hearing, the Coast Guard indicated its preferred strategy was to rely on mobile assets (vessels and aircraft) and seasonal bases of operation rather than pursue a permanent port in the Arctic.213 The U.S. Committee on the Marine Transportation System, a Cabinet-level committee of federal agencies with responsibilities for marine transportation, identified a list of infrastructure improvements for Arctic navigation in a 2013 report.214 The report prioritizes improvements to information infrastructure (weather forecasting, nautical charting, ship tracking) and emergency response capabilities for ships in distress. 209 In July and August 2010, NOAA surveyed the Bering Straits area in order to update its charts but stated that it will take more than 25 years to map the prioritized areas of navigational significance in U.S. Arctic waters. See http://www.noaanews.noaa.gov/stories2010/20100720_fairweather.html. 210 Ice reporting that currently exists is intended for scientists not mariners. 211 For further information, see http://www.poa.usace.army.mil/en/cw/AKPortsStudy.htm, and FY2013 USACE Budget Justification, p. POD-5. 212 Alaska Deep-Draft Arctic Port System Study, March 2013; http://www.poa.usace.army.mil/Library/ReportsandStudies/AlaskaRegionalPortsStudy.aspx. The navigation channel at Nome presently ranges from 10 to 20 feet in depth. Much of the harbor at Port Clarence has a natural depth of 35 to 40 feet; http://www.charts.noaa.gov/OnLineViewer/AlaskaViewerTable.shtml. 213 Oral testimony of Admiral Charles D. Michel, Coast Guard Vice Commandant, House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation, Coast Guard Arctic Implementation Capabilities, July 12, 2016. 214 U.S. Committee on the Marine Transportation System, U.S. Arctic Marine Transportation System: Overview and Priorities for Action, 2013; http://www.cmts.gov/downloads/CMTS_Arctic_MTS_Report_Narrative.pdf. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 68 Regulation of Arctic Shipping Due to the international nature of the shipping industry, maritime trading nations have adopted international treaties that establish standards for ocean carriers in terms of safety, pollution prevention, and security. These standards are agreed upon by shipping nations through the International Maritime Organization (IMO), a United Nations agency that first met in 1959.215 Key conventions that the 168 IMO member nations have adopted include the Safety of Life at Sea Convention (SOLAS), which was originally adopted in response to the Titanic disaster in 1912 but has since been revised several times; the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL), which was adopted in 1973 and modified in 1978; and the Standards for Training, Certification, and Watchkeeping for Seafarers (SCTW), which was adopted in 1978 and amended in 1995. It is up to ratifying nations to enforce these standards. The United States is a party to these conventions, and the U.S. Coast Guard enforces them when it boards and inspects ships and crews arriving at U.S. ports and the very few ships engaged in international trade that sail under the U.S. flag. Like the United States, most of the other major maritime trading nations lack the ability to enforce these regulations as a “flag state” because much of the world’s merchant fleet is registered under so-called “flags of convenience.” While most ship owners and operators are headquartered in major economies, they often register their ships in Panama, Liberia, the Bahamas, the Marshall Islands, Malta, and Cyprus, among other “open registries,” because these nations offer more attractive tax and employment regulatory regimes. Because of this development, most maritime trading nations enforce shipping regulations under a “port state control” regime—that is, they require compliance with these regulations as a condition of calling at their ports. The fragmented nature of ship ownership and operation can be a further hurdle to regulatory enforcement. It is common for cargo ships to be owned by one company, operated by a second company (which markets the ship’s space), and managed by a third (which may supply the crew and other services a ship requires to sail), each of which could be headquartered in different countries. New Arctic Polar Code While SOLAS and other IMO conventions include provisions regarding the operation of ships in ice-infested waters, they were not specific to the polar regions. To supplement these requirements, a new IMO polar code went into effect on January 1, 2017.216 The code applies to passenger and cargo ships of 500 gross tons or more engaged in international voyages. It does not apply to fishing vessels, military vessels, pleasure yachts, or smaller cargo ships. The polar requirements are intended to improve safety and prevent pollution in the Arctic, and they include provisions on ship construction, ship equipment related to navigation, and crew training and ship operation. The code requires ships to carry fully or partially enclosed lifeboats. The code requires that the crew have training in ice navigation. Nations can enforce additional requirements on ships arriving at their ports or sailing through their coastal waters. For instance, U.S. Coast Guard regulations largely follow IMO conventions but mandate additional requirements in some areas. U.S. coastal states can require ships calling at their ports to take additional safety and pollution prevention safeguards.217 Canada and Russia have additional pollution regulations for Arctic waters 215 See http://www.imo.org/ for more information. 216 http://www.imo.org/en/MediaCentre/HotTopics/polar/Pages/default.aspx. 217 For example, see Alaska State Legislature, HJR 19, Arctic Marine Safety Agreements; http://www.akleg.gov/basis/Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 69 exceeding MARPOL. The U.S. Coast Guard has studied and has recommended a specific vessel traffic separation scheme for the Bering Strait between Alaska and Russia, which experiences over 400 transits per year.218 The U.S. Coast Guard is seeking IMO approval of this routing scheme. Oil, Gas, and Mineral Exploration219 Decreases in summer polar ice may alter options for oil, gas, and mineral exploration in Arctic offshore and onshore areas. Offshore of Alaska, the U.S. outer continental shelf (OCS) covers more than 1 billion acres,220 including some areas with high oil and gas potential. Even with warmer temperatures, exploration and development in the Arctic are still subject to harsh conditions, especially in winter. This makes it costly and challenging to develop the infrastructure necessary to produce, store, and transport oil, gas, and minerals from newly discovered deposits. Severe weather poses challenges to several ongoing offshore operations as well as to new exploration. Offshore oil and gas exploration is affected by efforts to map the margins of the U.S. OCS. Shrinking sea ice cover in the Arctic has intensified interest in surveying and mapping the continental margins of multiple countries with lands in the Arctic. Delineating the extent of the continental margins beyond the 200 nautical mile Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) could lead to consideration of development on substantial amounts of submerged lands. Mapping projects are underway, by individual countries and through cooperative government studies, to support submissions to the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, including for areas that may contain large amounts of oil, natural gas, methane hydrates, or minerals. With respect to onshore development, shrinking glaciers could expose land containing economic deposits of gold, iron ore, or other minerals previously covered by glacial ice. At the same time, warming that causes permafrost to melt could pose challenges to oil, gas, and mineral activities because ground structures, such as pipelines and other infrastructure that depend on footings sunk into the permafrost for support, could be compromised. In addition, warmer temperatures shorten the ice road transport seasons for oil, gas, and mineral development, creating transportation challenges. Offshore Oil and Gas Exploration The shrinking Arctic ice cap, or conversely, the growing amount of ice-free ocean in the summertime, has increased interest in exploring for offshore oil and gas in the Arctic. Reduced sea ice in the summer means that ships towing seismic arrays221 can explore regions of the Arctic Ocean, Chukchi Sea, Beaufort Sea, and other offshore regions for longer periods of time with less risk of colliding with floating sea ice. Less sea ice over longer periods compared to previous Bill/Detail/30?Root=HJR%2019. 21882 Federal Register 11935, February 27, 2017. 219 This section prepared by Laura Comay, Analyst in Natural Resources Policy, Resources, Science, and Industry Division; Peter Folger, Section Research Manager, Resources, Science, and Industry Division; and Marc Humphries, Analyst in Energy Policy, Resources, Science, and Industry Division. 220 This region includes some areas within the Arctic boundary as defined by the ARPA (15 U.S.C. 4111; see Figure 1), such as the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas, and some areas outside that boundary, such as Cook Inlet. 221 A seismic array is typically a long string or streamer of geophones—acoustic devices used for recording seismic signals—towed behind a ship while the ship traverses a prospective oil and gas-bearing portion of the seafloor. The seismic signals are processed and interpreted to give a cross-section or three-dimensional image of the subsurface. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 70 decades also means that the seasonal window for offshore Arctic drilling remains open longer in the summer, increasing the chances for making a discovery. In addition to the improved access to larger portions of the Arctic afforded by shrinking sea ice, interest in Arctic oil and gas was fueled by a 2008 U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) appraisal of undiscovered oil and gas north of the Arctic Circle.222 The USGS stated that the “extensive Arctic continental shelves may constitute the geographically largest unexplored prospective area for petroleum remaining on Earth.”223 In the report, the USGS estimated that 90 billion barrels of oil, nearly 1,700 trillion cubic feet of natural gas, and 44 billion barrels of natural gas liquids may remain to be discovered in the Arctic (including both U.S. and international resources north of the Arctic Circle).224 This would constitute approximately 13% of the world’s undiscovered conventional oil resources and 30% of natural gas, according the U.S. Energy Information Administration.225 In terms of U.S. resources specifically, DOI’s Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) estimated in 2017 that the Alaska portions of the U.S. OCS contain undiscovered, technically recoverable resources of approximately 27 billion barrels of oil and 132 trillion cubic feet of natural gas (although not all of these resources may be economically viable to recover).226 Despite the warming trend in the Arctic, severe weather and sea ice continue to pose challenges to exploration. In addition, any discovery of new oil and gas deposits far from existing storage, pipelines, and shipping facilities could not be developed until infrastructure is built to extract and transport the petroleum. Some have expressed interest in expanding America’s ocean energy portfolio in the region. Currently, among 15 federal planning areas in the region, the Beaufort Sea and Cook Inlet are the only two areas with active federal leases,227 and only the Beaufort Sea has any producing wells in federal waters (from a joint federal-state unit).228 The Trump Administration has stated its interest in promoting offshore development in the region. In January 2018, the Administration issued a draft 5-year offshore oil and gas leasing program for 2019-2024 that would schedule lease sales in all 15 Alaska planning areas, including three sales in the Beaufort Sea and three in the Chukchi Sea.229 Current lease sales on the Alaska OCS are governed by the Obama Administration’s 222 See USGS Fact Sheet 2008-3049, Circum-Arctic Resource Appraisal: Estimates of Undiscovered Oil and Gas North of the Arctic Circle, at http://pubs.usgs.gov/fs/2008/3049/, hereinafter referred to as “USGS 2008 Fact Sheet.” 223 USGS 2008 Fact Sheet. 224 USGS 2008 Fact Sheet, p. 1. 225 U.S. Energy Information Administration, “Today in Energy: Arctic Oil and Natural Gas Resources,” January 20, 2012, at http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=4650. 226 Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, “Assessment of Undiscovered Technically Recoverable Oil and Gas Resources of the Nation’s Outer Continental Shelf, 2016a,” at https://www.boem.gov/UTRR-Update_BTU/. Although dated 2016, the assessment reflects 2017 updates of nearshore Beaufort Sea resources based on new data from seismic surveys and drilling onshore and in state waters, pursuant to DOI Secretarial Order 3352. Not all of the undiscovered technically recoverable resources would necessarily be economically recoverable. BOEM’s 2019-2024 Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Leasing Draft Proposed Program (January 2015, chapter 5, at https://www.boem.gov/NP-Draft-Proposed-Program-2019-2024/, hereinafter cited as “BOEM 2019-2024 Draft Proposed Program.”) estimates a range of resources that would be economically recoverable under various oil and gas price points and cost conditions. 227 Although part of BOEM’s Alaska region, Cook Inlet lies outside the Arctic boundary as defined by the ARPA (15 U.S.C. 4111; see Figure 1). 228 Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, “BP Exploration (Alaska) (BPXA)—Northstar,” at http://www.boem.gov/About-BOEM/BOEM-Regions/Alaska-Region/Leasing-and-Plans/Plans/BP-North-Star.aspx. 229 BOEM 2019-2024 Draft Proposed Program, p. 8. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 71 leasing program for 2017-2022, which includes one lease sale in the Cook Inlet (scheduled for 2021) and none in other Alaska planning areas.230 Offshore oil and gas activities in the region have fluctuated as industry weighs changing oil prices, development costs, and regulations. For example, in 2015, Shell Oil Company announced its decision to cease exploration in offshore Alaska for the foreseeable future. Shell cited several reasons for the decision, including insufficient indications of oil and gas at its Burger J well in the Chukchi Sea, the high costs associated with Arctic exploration, and the “challenging and unpredictable” federal regulatory environment.231 BOEM also reported that, between February and November 2016, companies relinquished more than 90% of leases they had held in the Beaufort and Chukchi Sea planning areas, in the midst of a slump in oil prices.232 While there were 450 active leases in the Chukchi Sea planning area at the end of 2015, as of November 2019 there were none.233 In the Beaufort Sea, active leases dropped from 77 at the end of 2015 to 40 in November 2019.234 Despite these changes, some activities have indicated ongoing industry interest in the region. For example, in November 2017, the Trump Administration approved an application for permit to drill (APD) on a lease in the Beaufort Sea held by the Eni U.S. Operating Company.235 In October 2018, BOEM issued conditional approval to Hilcorp Alaska LLC for an oil and gas development and production plan in the Beaufort Sea, which would be the region’s first production facility entirely in federal waters.236 Recent discoveries onshore and in state waters on Alaska’s North Slope have contributed to ongoing interest in the region. The evolving federal regulatory environment for Arctic offshore activities has been shaped by concerns about industry’s ability to respond to potential oil spills, given the region’s remoteness and harsh conditions. The section of this report on “Oil Pollution Implications of Arctic Change” discusses this issue in greater detail. In July 2016, BOEM and the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) released final safety regulations for Arctic exploratory drilling that include multiple requirements for companies to reduce the risks of potential oil spills—for example, the requirement that companies have a separate rig available at drill sites to 230 Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, 2017-2022 Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Leasing Proposed Final Program, November 2016, at https://www.boem.gov/2017-2022-OCS-Oil-and-Gas-Leasing-PFP/, hereinafter cited as “BOEM 2017-2022 Proposed Final Program.” 231 Royal Dutch Shell, PLC, “Shell Updates on Alaska Exploration,” press release, September 28, 2015, at http://www.shell.com/global/aboutshell/media/news-and-media-releases/2015/shell-updates-on-alaska-exploration.html. 232 BOEM 2017-2022 Proposed Final Program, p. S-3. 233 For 2015 data, see BOEM, “Combined Leasing Report, as of January 1, 2016,” at https://www.boem.gov/Combined-Leasing-Reports-2016/. For November 2019 data, see BOEM, “Combined Leasing Report, as of November 1, 2019,” at https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/documents/oil-gas-energy/leasing/Combined%20Leasing%20Statistics%20November%202019.pdf. 234 Ibid. 235 Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE), “BSEE Approves New Drilling Operations in Arctic,” press release, November 28, 2017, at https://www.bsee.gov/newsroom/latest-news/statements-and-releases/press-releases/bsee-approves-new-drilling-operations-in. The BSEE Director stated in the press release that “responsible resource development in the Arctic is a critical component to achieving American energy dominance.” 236 Department of the Interior press release, “Interior Approves Long-Awaited First Oil Production Facility in Federal Waters Offshore Alaska,” October 24, 2018, at https://www.doi.gov/pressreleases/interior-approves-long-awaited-first-oil-production-facility-federal-waters-offshore. On May 29, 2019, NOAA’s National Marine Fisheries Service issued a proposed rule to govern the taking of marine mammals incidental to the construction and operation of the project’s drilling and production island (84 Federal Register 24926). Public comments were accepted through July 31, 2019 (84 Federal Register 32697). Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 72 drill a relief well in case of a loss of well control.237 Some Members of Congress and industry stakeholders opposed the regulations as overly prescriptive and unnecessarily burdensome, while other Members and environmental organizations asserted that the rules did not go far enough in protecting the region from potential environmental damage and addressing the potential contributions of Arctic oil and gas activities to climate change.238 In a 2017 executive order, President Trump directed the Secretary of the Interior to review the Arctic regulations, and in 2018 the Department of the Interior announced work on rule revisions.239 Legislation was introduced in the 115th Congress both to repeal the Obama Administration’s version of the Arctic rule and, conversely, to codify it in law.240 Concerns about the impacts of oil and gas activities have led in the past to bans by both Congress and the President on leasing in certain Arctic Ocean areas deemed especially sensitive.241 For example, congressional and presidential moratoria since the 1980s effectively banned federally regulated planning and permitting in the Bristol Bay area of the North Aleutian Basin. Congress allowed most statutory bans in the region to expire in 2004.242 President Obama reinstated the moratorium in the North Aleutian Basin, indefinitely withdrawing acreage located in Bristol Bay from eligibility for oil and gas leasing.243 Also, in December 2016, President Obama indefinitely withdrew from leasing disposition other large portions of the U.S. Arctic, including the entire Chukchi Sea planning area and almost all of the Beaufort Sea planning area.244 President Obama 237 Department of the Interior, “Requirements for Exploratory Drilling on the Arctic Outer Continental Shelf,” 81 Federal Register 46477, July 15, 2016. 238 For differing congressional viewpoints, see, e.g., U.S. Congress, House Committee on Natural Resources, Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources, hearing on Arctic Resources and American Competitiveness, 114th Cong., 1st sess., June 16, 2015, at http://naturalresources.house.gov/calendar/eventsingle.aspx?EventID=398713. 239 Executive Order 13795, “Implementing an America-First Offshore Energy Strategy,” April 28, 2017, at https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2017-05-03/pdf/2017-09087.pdf. For the DOI announcement, see Department of the Interior, “Semiannual Regulatory Agenda,” 83 Fed. Reg. 58039, November 16, 2018. 240 For example, in the 115th Congress, H.R. 4239, the SECURE American Energy Act, would have provided that the Arctic rule would have no force or effect. Conversely, S. 2720, the Clean Coasts Act, would have enacted the regulation into law. These measures were not enacted, and no similar legislation has been introduced to date in the 116th Congress. 241 Section 12(a) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. §1341(a)) authorizes the President to, “from time to time, withdraw from disposition any of the unleased lands of the outer Continental Shelf.” 242 FY2004 DOI Appropriations (P.L. 108-108). Furthermore, the Continuing Appropriations Resolution 2009 (P.L. 110-329) did not extend the annual congressional moratorium on oil and gas leasing activities in the lower 48 states. On March 11, 2009, the Omnibus Appropriations Act, 2009 (P.L. 111-8) was enacted without moratorium provisions, confirming that the congressional oil and gas development bans in federal waters along the Atlantic and Pacific coasts, parts of Alaska, and the Gulf of Mexico that had been in place since 1982 had not been restored in 2009 appropriations measures. 243 Presidential Memorandum, “Withdrawal of Certain Areas of the United States Outer Continental Shelf from Leasing Disposition,” December 16, 2014, at http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/12/16/presidential-memorandum-withdrawal-certain-areas-united-states-outer-con. Earlier, President Obama had withdrawn the area from leasing for a time-limited period. Presidential Memorandum, “Withdrawal of Certain Areas of the United States Outer Continental Shelf from Leasing Disposition,” March 31, 2010, at http://www.doi.gov/whatwedo/energy/ocs/upload/2010alaska-mem-rel.pdf. 244 Presidential Memorandum, “Withdrawal of Certain Portions of the United States Arctic Outer Continental Shelf from Mineral Leasing,” December 20, 2016, at https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/12/20/presidential-memorandum-withdrawal-certain-portions-united-states-arctic. Earlier, President Obama had indefinitely withdrawn from leasing disposition certain smaller areas in the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas, including the Hanna Shoal region of the Chukchi Sea and other areas. Presidential Memorandum, “Withdrawal of Certain Areas of the United States Outer Continental Shelf Offshore Alaska from Leasing Disposition,” January 27, 2015, at http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/01/27/presidential-memorandum-withdrawal-certain-areas-united-states-outer-con. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 73 separately withdrew from leasing consideration planning areas in the North Bering Sea.245 In April 2017, President Trump issued Executive Order 13795, which modified President Obama’s withdrawals so as to open all of these areas for leasing consideration except for the North Aleutian Basin.246 However, in a March 2019 court decision, the U.S. District Court for the District of Alaska vacated this provision in President Trump’s executive order, ruling that the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act gives the President the authority to make withdrawals, but not to revoke prior presidential withdrawals.247 Extent of the Continental Margin Increased interest in developing offshore resources in the Arctic has sparked efforts by Arctic coastal states to map the extent of their continental margins beyond the 200-mile EEZ limit. As discussed earlier, under Article 76 of UNCLOS, nations can make a submission to the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf (hereinafter referred to as the Commission) concerning the extent of their continental shelves. Under Article 76, the extent of the continental margin beyond the 200-mile limit depends on the position of the foot of the continental slope, the thickness of sediments, and the depth of water. Also, the continental margin could include geologic features that extend from the continent out to sea, which may include undersea ridges continuing for hundreds of miles offshore. Arctic coastal states have conducted complex investigations needed to support submissions to the Commission for an extended continental shelf in the Arctic. Submissions regarding Arctic waters have been made to the Commission by four of the Arctic coastal states, including the Russian Federation, which made its initial UNCLOS submission to a portion of the Arctic continental shelf in 2001.248 Russia’s 2001 submission included the Lomonosov Ridge, an undersea feature spanning the Arctic from Russia to Canada, as an extension of its continental margin. The submission demonstrated Russia’s bid to extend activities in Arctic regions. The Russian Federation presented a revised submission in 2015 to the Commission that included not only the Lomonosov Ridge but also the Mendeleev Rise—another subsea feature claimed by Russia to be a natural part of its continental margin—as components of the extended Russian continental shelf.249 The Commission has not rendered a decision on the revised Russian Federation 245 Executive Order 13754, “North Bering Sea Climate Resilience,” December 9, 2016, at https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2016-12-14/pdf/2016-30277.pdf. 246 Executive Order 13795, “Implementing an America-First Offshore Energy Strategy,” April 28, 2017, at https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2017-05-03/pdf/2017-09087.pdf. For additional discussion, see CRS Legal Sidebar WSLG1799, Trump’s Executive Order on Offshore Energy: Can a Withdrawal be Withdrawn? 247 League of Conservation Voters v. Trump, 363 F.Supp.3d 1013 (D.Alaska 2019). The President’s withdrawal authority is contained in Section 12(a) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. Section 1341(a)). 248 Denmark, Norway, and Canada have also filed submissions regarding Arctic waters. A fifth country, Iceland, though not an Arctic coastal state, has filed a submission regarding waters in the vicinity of the Arctic Circle. Source: United Nations, Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, “Submissions, through the Secretary-General of the United Nations, to the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, pursuant to article 76, paragraph 8, of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982,” updated December 12, 2019, accessed March 23, 2020, at https://www.un.org/Depts/los/clcs_new/commission_submissions.htm. See also Department of State, “Frequently Asked Questions – U.S. Extended Continental Shelf Project,” accessed March 23, 2020, at https://www.state.gov/frequently-asked-questions-u-s-extended-continental-shelf-project/. For additional information, see Appendix E. 249 United Nations, “Partial Revised Submission of the Russian Federation to the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf in Respect of the Continental Shelf of the Russian Federation in the Arctic Ocean,” 2015, http://www.un.org/Depts/los/clcs_new/submissions_files/rus01_rev15/2015_08_03_Exec_Summary_English.pdf. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 74 submission as of late 2019. (For additional information on extended continental shelf submissions to the Commission, see Appendix E.) The United States has started to gather and analyze data for a potential submission through an initiative called the Extended Continental Shelf (ECS) Project.250 The U.S. ECS project has also assisted more than 30 countries with their efforts to delineate their extended continental shelves worldwide.251 Canada and the United States share overlapping regions of the seabed as part of the extended continental margin of both nations. Much of the data to delineate the ECS for both countries was collected in a two-ship operation involving the U.S. Coast Guard Cutter Healy and the Canadian Coast Guard ship Louis S. Saint Laurent.252 The two-ship operation collected more than 13,000 linear kilometers (about 8,078 miles) of seismic data over four field seasons in the Arctic beginning in 2007. The data collected will help each country delineate the extent of its own ECS, which should then enable the countries to determine the amount of overlap in the seabed and ultimately establish a maritime boundary in the Arctic.253 The United States also has potentially overlapping ECS areas with Russia. Russia (then the Soviet Union) and the United States agreed to a maritime boundary in 1990, and so far Russia has not asserted its ECS in any areas that might be considered part of the U.S. ECS.254 Onshore Mineral Development A warming Arctic means new opportunities and challenges for mineral exploration and development onshore. Receding glaciers expose previously ice-covered land that could host economic mineral deposits that were previously undetectable and unmineable below the ice. Longer summers also would extend exploration seasons for areas that are not currently ice-covered, but are only accessible for ground surveys during the warmer months. In some parts of the Arctic, less sea ice allows ships to transport heavy equipment to remote locations, and to convey ore from mines to the market further south. Some railway and mining operators are considering developing railroads and other infrastructure to transport ore year-round. As with onshore oil and gas development, however, mining infrastructure that depends on footings sunk into permafrost could become unstable if the permafrost melts in response to warmer temperatures.255 Also, mineral deposits that may be technically recoverable with current technology may not be economically profitable. 250 The purpose of the U.S. Extended Continental Shelf (ECS) Project is to establish the full extent of the continental shelf of the United States, consistent with international law. The work to delineate the ECS is coordinated by the ECS Task Force, located at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA’s) National Centers for Environmental Information in Boulder, CO. The Department of State, U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), and NOAA conduct the majority of work on the project. NOAA has the lead in collecting bathymetric data. USGS has the lead in collecting seismic data. For more information, see the project’s website at https://www.state.gov/u-s-extended-continental-shelf-project/. 251 U.S. ECS Project, https://www.state.gov/international-support-and-cooperation-u-s-extended-continental-shelf-project/. 252 Ibid. 253 Ibid. 254 The Senate gave advice and consent to ratify the maritime boundary agreement in 1991. Although the Russian Duma has not approved the agreement, both countries continue to provisionally apply the boundary agreement. See U.S. Extended Continental Shelf Project, https://www.state.gov/frequently-asked-questions-u-s-extended-continental-shelf-project/. 255 This section does not treat onshore oil and gas development on federal lands in the Arctic region, such as the National Petroleum Reserve-Alaska or the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. For more information on the oil and gas program for the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and related issues, see CRS Report RL33872, Arctic National Wildlife Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 75 Some industry commentators suggest that mining might offer better long-term economic development opportunities compared to oil and gas development because of a larger permanent workforce and project lifetimes of several decades.256 Similar to oil and gas, however, industry observers note that uncertainties and knowledge gaps exist in the understanding of environmental change in the Arctic, and how to deal with the risks associated with significant Arctic industrial activity.257 One important part of the current infrastructure in the Arctic that supports oil, gas, and mineral development is the construction and use of ice roads—built and used during the winter, but not passable during the warmer months. Warmer temperatures are shortening the ice road transport seasons and creating transportation challenges. For example, the opening date for tundra roads in northern Alaska usually occurred in early November prior to 1991 and has shifted to January in recent years.258 Oil Pollution and Pollution Response259 Oil Pollution Implications of Arctic Change Climate change impacts in the Arctic, particularly the decline of sea ice and retreating glaciers, has led to increased human activities in the region, some of which have the potential to create oil pollution.260 A primary concern is the threat of a large oil spill in the area. Although a major oil spill has not occurred in the Arctic, potential economic activity, such as tourism (cruise ships), oil and gas exploration, and cargo transportation, increases the risk of oil pollution (and other kinds of pollution) in the Arctic.261 Significant spills in high northern latitudes (e.g., the 1989 Exxon Valdez spill on the southern coast of Alaska and spills in the North Sea) suggest that the “potential impacts of an Arctic spill are likely to be severe for Arctic species and ecosystems.”262 Risk of Oil Pollution in the Arctic A primary factor determining the risk of oil pollution in the Arctic is the level and type of human activity conducted in the region. Although changes to the Arctic climate are expected to increase access to natural resources and shipping lanes, the region will continue to present logistical challenges that may hinder human activity in the region. For example, unpredictable ice conditions may discourage trans-Arctic shipping. If trans-Arctic shipping were to occur Refuge (ANWR): An Overview. 256 See, e.g., Cecelia Jamasmie, “Melting Arctic is nothing but good news for the mining industry: Lloyd's/Chatham House,” Mining.com, April 13, 2012, at http://www.mining.com/melting-arctic-is-nothing-but-good-news-for-the-mining-industry-lloydschatam-house/. 257 Charles Emmerson and Glada Lahn, Arctic Opening: Opportunity and Risk in the High North, Chatham House, 2012, at https://www.chathamhouse.org/publications/papers/view/182839. 258 See National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “Arctic Change,” at https://www.pmel.noaa.gov/arctic-zone/detect/land-road.shtml?page=land. 259 This section prepared by Jonathan L. Ramseur, Specialist in Environmental Policy, Resources, Science, and Industry Division. 260 For further discussion of issues relating to oil spills in general, see CRS Report RL33705, Oil Spills: Background and Governance. 261 Arctic Council, Emergency Prevention, Preparedness and Response Working Group, Guide to Oil Spill Response in Snow and Ice Conditions, 2015, at https://oaarchive.arctic-council.org/handle/11374/403; see also Brian Dunn, “Report on 12th Arctic Shipping Summit, Montreal, February 21-22,” Canadian Sailings, March 12, 2018, pp. 34-36. 262 Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP), Arctic Oil and Gas 2007, 2008. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 76 frequently, it would likely represent a considerable portion of the overall oil pollution risk in the region. In recent decades, many of the world’s largest oil spills have been from oil tankers, which can carry millions of gallons of oil.263 Offshore oil exploration and extraction activities in the Arctic may present a risk of oil pollution. Interest in these activities in the region has fluctuated in recent years. Historically, oil well blowouts from offshore oil operations have been a source of major oil spills, eclipsing the largest tanker spills. The largest unintentional oil spill in recent history was from the 2010 Deepwater Horizon incident in the Gulf of Mexico.264 During that incident, the uncontrolled well released (over an 87-day period) approximately 200 million gallons of crude oil.265 The second-largest unintentional oil spill in recent history—the IXTOC I, estimated at 140 million gallons—was due to an oil well blowout in Mexican Gulf Coast waters in 1979.266 Until the 2010 Deepwater Horizon incident, the spill record for offshore platforms in U.S. federal waters had shown improvement from prior years.267 A 2003 National Research Council (NRC) study of oil and gas activities on Alaska’s North Slope stated “blowouts that result in large spills are unlikely.”268 Similar conclusions were made in federal agency documents regarding deepwater drilling in the Gulf of Mexico before the 2010 Deepwater Horizon event.269 Some would likely contend that the underlying analyses behind these conclusions should be adjusted to account for the 2010 Gulf oil spill. However, others may argue that any activities in U.S. Arctic waters present less risk of an oil well blowout than was encountered by the Deepwater Horizon drill rig, because the proposed U.S. Arctic operations would be in shallower waters (150 feet) than the deepwater well (approximately 5,000 feet) that was involved in the 2010 Gulf oil spill. In addition, some have pointed out that the pressures in the Chukchi Sea would be two to three times less than they were in the well involved in the 2010 Gulf oil spill.270 Regardless of these differences, even under the most stringent control systems, oil exploration and extraction activities would present some level of oil spill risk in the region, as some accidents are likely to occur from equipment failure or human error. In addition, as discussed below, an oil spill in the Arctic would present unique response and cleanup challenges. 263 For example, the Exxon Valdez spilled approximately 11 million gallons of oil, but its carrying capacity was approximately 60 million gallons. 264 Larger oil spills occurred during the 1991 Iraq War, but many of those spills were deliberate. A 1910-1911 onshore oil blowout in the California San Joaquin Valley is reported to have spilled 9.4 million barrels of crude oil (almost 400 million gallons). 265 An estimated 17% of this oil did not enter the Gulf environment but was directly recovered from the wellhead by the responsible party (British Petroleum, BP). See the Federal Interagency Solutions Group, Oil Budget Calculator Science and Engineering Team, Oil Budget Calculator: Deepwater Horizon-Technical Documentation, November 2010; and CRS Report R42942, Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill: Recent Activities and Ongoing Developments. 266 National Research Council (NRC) of the National Academies of Science, Oil in the Sea III: Inputs, Fates, and Effects, 2003. 267 See CRS Report RL33705, Oil Spills: Background and Governance; and Dagmar Etkin (Environmental Research Consulting), Analysis of U.S. Oil Spillage, Prepared for American Petroleum Institute, August 2009. 268 National Research Council of the National Academies of Science, Cumulative Environmental Effects of Oil and Gas Activities on Alaska’s North Slope, 2003. 269 See, for example, Minerals Management Service (MMS), Outer Continental Shelf Oil & Gas Leasing Program: 2007-2012, Final Environmental Impact Statement, 2007, chapter 4; MMS, Proposed Gulf of Mexico OCS Oil and Gas Lease Sale 206, Central Planning Area, Environmental Assessment, 2007. 270 Letter from Marvin E. Odum, President, Shell Oil Company to S. Elizabeth Birnbaum, Minerals Management Service (May 14, 2010). Cited in a staff paper from the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling (“The Challenges of Oil Spill Response in the Arctic,” 2011). Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 77 Potential Impacts No oil spill is entirely benign. Even a relatively minor spill, depending on the timing and location, can cause significant harm to individual organisms and entire populations. Regarding aquatic spills, marine mammals, birds, bottom-dwelling and intertidal species, and organisms in early developmental stages—eggs or larvae—are especially vulnerable. However, the effects of oil spills can vary greatly. Oil spills can cause impacts over a range of time scales, from only a few days to several years, or even decades in some cases. Conditions in the Arctic may have implications for oil spill impacts that are less understood than in the more temperate regions.271 According to a 2016 study, “oil spill science in ice-covered waters is at an ad hoc level.”272 For example, information on the long-term effects of oil and its environmental persistence within the Arctic is limited.273 In addition, the historical data for the region do not provide reliable baselines to assess current environmental or ecosystem states,274 presenting challenges to those tasked with measuring impacts. Response and Cleanup Challenges in the Arctic Conditions in the Arctic impose unique challenges for personnel charged with (1) oil spill response, which is the process of getting people and equipment to the incident, and (2) cleanup duties, either recovering the spilled oil or mitigating the contamination so that it poses less harm to the ecosystem. These challenges may play a role in policy development for economic activities in the Arctic. Spill Response Challenges Response time is a critical factor for oil spill recovery. With each hour, spilled oil becomes more difficult to track, contain, and recover, particularly in icy conditions, where oil can migrate under or mix with surrounding ice.275 Most response techniques call for quick action, which may pose logistical challenges in areas without prior staging equipment or trained response professionals. Many stakeholders are concerned about a “response gap” for oil spills in the Arctic.276 A response gap is a period of time in which oil spill response activities would be unsafe or infeasible. A 2016 study (prepared for the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement) estimated response gaps for two locations in the U.S. Beaufort and Chukchi Seas during the summer and winter seasons, and for the year overall. 277 The study found that during the summer months (July-October), open water oil recovery would not be “favorable” approximately 33% of the time.278 By 271 National Research Council (NRC) of the National Academies of Science, Responding to Oil Spills in the U.S. Arctic Marine Environment, 2014 (hereinafter, NRC Report, 2014). 272 Mawuli Afenyo, “A State-of-the-Art Review of Fate and Transport of Oil Spills in Open and Ice-Covered Water,” Ocean Engineering, 2016. 273 NRC Report, 2014. 274 Ibid. 275 World Wildlife Fund, Oil Spill: Response Challenges in Arctic Waters (2007). 276 Coastal Response Research Center, Opening the Arctic Seas: Envisioning Disasters and Framing Solutions (2009), partnership between the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the University of New Hampshire. 277 Nuka Research and Planning Group, Estimating an Oil Spill Response Gap for the U.S. Arctic Ocean, 2016; study funded by the Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement. 278 A 2017 study stated that most of the marine activities in the Arctic region occur during the summer months. See Jeremy Wilkinson, et al., “Oil Spill Response Capabilities and Technologies for Ice-Covered Arctic Marine Waters: A Review of Recent Developments and Established Practices,” Ambio, 2017. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 78 comparison, that estimate increases to 75% and 95% for the year overall and for the winter months (November-June), respectively. The response gap for the northern Arctic latitudes is likely to be extremely high compared to other regions.279 In the event of an oil spill, the Coast Guard has response authority in the coastal zone.280 A Coast Guard official would serve as the On-Scene Coordinator with the authority to perform cleanup immediately using federal resources, monitor the response efforts of the spiller, or direct the spiller’s cleanup activities. According to a 2014 National Research Council (NRC) report, “the lack of infrastructure in the Arctic would be a significant liability in the event of a large oil spill.”281 The logistics in the Arctic were described as a “tyranny of distance” by the Vice Commandant of the Coast Guard.282 The Coast Guard has no designated air stations north of Kodiak, AK, which is almost 1,000 miles from the northernmost point of land along the Alaskan coast in Point Barrow, AK.283 Although some of the communities have airstrips capable of landing cargo planes, no roads connect these Arctic communities to the main highway systems or large communities in Alaska.284 Vessel infrastructure is also limited. The nearest major port is in the Aleutian Islands, approximately 1,300 miles from Point Barrow. A 2010 Government Accountability Office (GAO) report identified further logistical obstacles that would hinder an oil spill response in the region, including “inadequate” ocean and weather information for the Arctic and technological problems with communications.285 A 2014 GAO report highlighted steps taken by some groups (e.g., the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) to improve some of these logistical elements.286 The U.S. Coast Guard includes an initiative to “strengthen marine environmental response in the Arctic” as part of its Arctic Strategy Implementation Plan.287 A 2016 GAO Report provided an initial assessment of these 279 A 2007 estimate of Prince William Sound (PWS) also may be instructive. A 2007 study found a response gap for PWS of 38% for the time of the study period (65% during the winter season). Note that PWS has existing infrastructure for response, while the more remote Arctic areas do not. Nuka Research and Planning Group, LLC, Response Gap Estimate for Two Operating Areas in Prince William Sound, Alaska (2007), Report to Prince William Sound Regional Citizens’ Advisory Council. 280 For more details, see CRS Report RL33705, Oil Spills: Background and Governance. 281 NRC Report, 2014. 282 Admiral Ray Charles, Vice Commandant of the Coast Guard, Testimony before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, December 12, 2019, https://www.commerce.senate.gov/2019/12/expanding-opportunities-challenges-and-threats-in-the-arctic-a-focus-on-the-u-s-coast-guard-arctic-strategic-outlook. 283 G.M. Sulmasy and A.P. Wood, U.S. Coast Guard Academy, “U.S. Coast Guard Activity in the Arctic Region,” Law of the Sea Institute, Occasional Paper #6, 2014; and U.S. Coast Guard, Report to Congress: U.S. Coast Guard Polar Operations, 2008. 284 NRC Report, 2014. 285 Government Accountability Office, Coast Guard: Efforts to Identify Arctic Requirements Are Ongoing, but More Communication about Agency Planning Efforts Would Be Beneficial, GAO-10-870, 2010. 286 Government Accountability Office, Key Issues Related to Commercial Activity in the U.S. Arctic over the Next Decade, GAO-14-299, 2014. 287 U.S. Coast Guard, Arctic Strategy Implementation Plan, 2015, https://www.dco.uscg.mil/Portals/9/DCO%20Documents/5pw/Arctic%20Policy/CGAS%20IPlan%20Final%20Signed.pdf?ver=2017-08-25-075935-927. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 79 efforts.288 In 2019, the Coast Guard issued its Arctic Strategic Outlook, which stated one of its objectives was to “enhance capability to operate effectively in a dynamic Arctic.”289 In addition, the Department of the Interior’s BOEM and BSEE issued a final rule in 2016 requiring certain safety measures for drilling operations in the Arctic, but, as discussed above, the status of that rulemaking is uncertain.290 The costs of an oil spill response would likely be significantly higher than a similar incident in lower latitude locations of comparable remoteness. This could place a relatively larger burden on the oil spill liability and compensation framework.291 Pursuant to the Oil Pollution Act (OPA),292 parties responsible for an oil spill may be liable for cleanup costs, natural resource damages, and specific economic damages.293 OPA provided both limited defenses from liability and conditional liability limits for cleanup costs and other eligible damages.294 The Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund (OSLTF) provides an immediate source of funds for federal responses to oil spills and compensation for certain damages.295 The OSLTF can be used if a responsible party’s liability limit is reached, but the fund can only provide $1 billion per incident.296 Oil Spill Cleanup Challenges The history of oil spill response in the Aleutian Islands highlights the challenges and concerns for potential spills in the Arctic: The past 20 years of data on response to spills in the Aleutians has also shown that almost no oil has been recovered during events where attempts have been made by the responsible parties or government agencies, and that in many cases, weather and other conditions have prevented any response at all.297 The behavior of oil spills in cold and icy waters is not as well understood as oil spills in more temperate climates.298 In addition, in the summer months, the sea ice zone is a particularly challenging environment because the concentration of ice floes within a region is continuously changing.299 The 2014 NRC report highlights some recent advancements in understanding oil spill behavior in the Arctic climate. At the same time, the report recommends further study on a range of related issues. 288 Government Accountability Office, Arctic Strategy Is Underway, but Agency Could Better Assess How Its Actions Mitigate Known Arctic Capability Gaps, GAO-16-453, 2016. 289 U.S. Coast Guard, Arctic Strategic Outlook, 2019, https://www.uscg.mil/Portals/0/Images/arctic/Arctic_Strategic_Outlook_APR_2019.pdf. 290 See the section above titled “Offshore Oil and Gas Exploration.” 291 For more information on this framework, see CRS Report RL33705, Oil Spills: Background and Governance. 292 P.L. 101-380, primarily codified at 33 U.S.C. §2701 et seq. 293 33 U.S.C. §2702. 294 33 U.S.C. §2703 and §2704. 295 33 U.S.C. §2712. 296 26 U.S.C. §9509. 297 Transportation Research Board of the National Academy of Sciences, Risk of Vessel Accidents and Spills in the Aleutian Islands: Designing a Comprehensive Risk Assessment (2008), Special Report 293, National Academies Press. Washington, DC. 298 NRC Report, 2014. 299 Jeremy Wilkinson, et al., “Oil Spill Response Capabilities and Technologies for Ice-Covered Arctic Marine Waters: A Review of Recent Developments and Established Practices,” Ambio, 2017. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 80 The 2014 NRC report states that in colder water temperatures or sea ice, “the processes that control oil weathering—such as spreading, evaporation, photo-oxidation, emulsification, and natural dispersion—are slowed down or eliminated for extended periods of time.”300 In some respects, the slower weathering processes may provide more time for response strategies, such as in situ burning or skimming. On the other hand, the longer the oil remains in an ecosystem, the more opportunity there is for exposure to humans and other species in the ecosystem. In addition, the 2014 report states the following: Arctic conditions impose many challenges for oil spill response—low temperatures and extended periods of darkness in the winter, oil that is encapsulated under ice or trapped in ridges and leads, oil spreading due to sea ice drift and surface currents, reduced effectiveness of conventional containment and recovery systems in measurable ice concentrations, and issues of life and safety of responders. Oil Spill Policy – Regional Framework The existing framework for international governance of maritime operations in the Arctic combines broader maritime agreements and agreements that focus on the geographic region. In terms of broader frameworks, the Safety of Life at Sea Convention (SOLAS) and other International Maritime Organization (IMO) conventions include provisions regarding ships in icy waters, but the provisions are not specific to the polar regions. The IMO’s International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters (Polar Code) entered into force in 2017 and is mandatory under SOLAS and the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (known as MARPOL).301 The Polar Code addresses a range of issues, including environmental protection. In 2013, the member states of the Arctic Council signed an Agreement on Cooperation on Marine Oil Pollution Preparedness and Response in the Arctic.302 The agreement’s objective is to “strengthen cooperation, coordination, and mutual assistance ... on oil pollution preparedness and response in the Arctic.” The agreement entered force in 2016.303 A 2018 Coast Guard document describes the agreement as “binding.”304 The agreement includes multiple requirements for the parties, including oil spill notification, a process for requesting assistance and seeking reimbursement for costs, and joint preparation activities. Pursuant to the agreement the Arctic nations have conducted several joint training exercises.305 In addition, the United States has separate bilateral agreements with Canada and Russia that address oil spill response operations. The agreement with Canada was established in 1974 for the Great Lakes and has been amended several times to add more geographic areas, including Arctic 300 NRC Report, 2014. 301 See the above section titled “Regulation of Arctic Shipping.” 302 Available at http://www.arctic-council.org. The agreement is sometimes described as the Agreement on Cooperation on Marine Oil Spill Preparedness and Response in the Arctic (MOSPA). 303 Arctic Council, Status of ratification of Agreements negotiated under the auspices of the Arctic Council, 2016. 304 U.S. Coast Guard, Marine Environmental Response and Preparedness Manual, 2018, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Oct/01/2002046527/-1/-1/0/CIM_16000_14A.PDF. 305 See Arctic Council, Emergency Prevention Preparedness and Response Working Group, Planning Guidance for MOSPA Exercises, 2019; see also Michael LeVine et al., “Oil Spill Response in the North American Arctic,” in Managing the Risks of Offshore Oil and Gas Accidents: The International Legal Dimension, edited by Gunther Handl and Kristoffer Svendsen, 2019. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 81 waters.306 According to the 2014 NRC report: “formal contingency planning and exercises with Canada have enabled both the United States and Canada to refine procedures and legal requirements for cross-border movement of technical experts and equipment in the event of an emergency.” The U.S.-Russian agreement was made in 1989 and applies to oil spill-related activities in Arctic waters. The 2014 NRC report asserted that the agreement has not been tested to the same extent as the U.S.-Canada agreement. In 2018, officials from both nations reportedly held a tabletop exercise for an oil spill scenario in the Bering Strait.307 Fisheries308 The effects of climate change such as increasing sea surface temperatures and decreasing permanent sea ice are altering the composition of marine ecosystems in the Arctic. These changes are likely to affect the ranges and productivity of living marine resources including species that support marine fisheries. Furthermore, as a greater portion of the waters in the central Arctic Ocean become open for longer periods, the region’s resources will become more accessible to commercial fishing. Large commercial fisheries already exist in the Arctic, including in the Barents and Norwegian Seas north of Europe, the Central North Atlantic off Greenland and Iceland, the Bering Sea off Russia and the United States (Alaska), and the Newfoundland and Labrador Seas off northeastern Canada.309 As environmental changes occur, fisheries managers will be challenged to adjust management measures for existing fisheries. Uncertainties related to these changes and potential new fisheries in the central Arctic Ocean have prompted many fishery managers to support precautionary approaches to fisheries management in the region. On June 1, 2008, Congress passed a joint resolution (P.L. 110-243) that directed “the United States to initiate international discussions and take necessary steps with other nations to negotiate an agreement for managing migratory and transboundary fish stocks in the Arctic Ocean.” The joint resolution also supported establishment of a new international fisheries management organization or organizations for the region. International cooperation is necessary to manage Arctic resources because fish stocks are shared to some degree among the five adjacent jurisdictional zones of the Arctic rim nations. Further, a large portion of the central Arctic Ocean lies outside the Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ) of these nations. Ideally, regional management would recognize the need to coordinate management for those fish populations that move among these national jurisdictional zones and high seas. For waters under U.S. jurisdiction, in 2009, the National Marine Fisheries Service in the Department of Commerce’s National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration implemented the North Pacific Council’s Fishery Management Plan for Fish Resources of the Arctic Management Area.310 The management area includes marine waters in the U.S. EEZ of the Chukchi and 306 For more information, see U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Oil Spill Preparedness, Prevention, and Response on the Alaska OCS, 2019. 307 World Wildlife Federation, “Russia and the United States Hold Joint Exercises to Respond to Oil Spills in the Bering Strait,” November 2018, https://wwf.ru/en/resources/news/bioraznoobrazie/rossiya-i-ssha-proveli-sovmestnye-ucheniya-po-reagirovaniyu-na-razlivy-nefti-v-beringovom-prolive/. 308 This section was prepared by Harold Upton, Analyst in Natural Resources Policy, Resources, Science, and Industry Division. 309 Erik J. Molenaar and Robert Corell, Arctic Fisheries, Arctic Transform, February 9, 2009; available at http://arctic-transform.org/download/FishBP.pdf. 310 74 Federal Register 56734-56746, November 3, 2009. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 82 Beaufort Seas.311 The plan initially prohibits commercial fishing in the Arctic Management Area and moves the northern boundary of the Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands king and tanner crab fishery management plan out of the Arctic Management Area south to the Bering Strait. The plan takes a precautionary approach by requiring the collection of more information before developing commercial fisheries in the region. On July 16, 2015, the five nations that surround the Arctic Ocean signed a declaration to prevent unregulated commercial fishing in the high seas portion of the central Arctic Ocean.312 The five nations agree that a precautionary approach to fishing is needed because there is limited scientific knowledge of marine resources in the region. Currently, there is no commercial fishing in central Arctic Ocean and it is questionable whether existing fisheries resources could sustain a fishery. The declaration includes the following interim measures:  to authorize our vessels to conduct commercial fishing in the high seas area only pursuant to one or more marine regional or subregional fisheries management organizations or arrangements that are or may be established to manage such fishing in accordance with recognized international standards;  to establish a joint program of scientific research with the aim of improving understanding of the ecosystems of this area and promote cooperation with relevant scientific bodies;  to promote compliance with these interim measures and with relevant international law, including by coordinating our monitoring, control, and surveillance activities in this area; and  to ensure that any noncommercial fishing in this area does not undermine the purpose of the interim measures, is based on scientific advice and is monitored, and that data obtained through any such fishing is shared. The declaration also recognizes the interests of indigenous peoples and the need to encourage other countries to take actions that are consistent with the interim measures. It appears that future management arrangements may include China, the EU, Iceland, Japan, and South Korea. Iceland has stated it regrets that although it has repeatedly asked to participate in the collaboration, the five states decided to keep Iceland outside consultations on the declaration.313 It remains an open question as to whether an Arctic Ocean regional fishery management organization will be established, which countries would be included in such an arrangement, and if commercial fisheries will be developed in the central Arctic Ocean. Protected Species314 Concern over development of the Arctic relates to how such development might affect threatened and endangered species. Under the Endangered Species Act (ESA, 16 U.S.C. §§1531-1543), the 311 The state of Alaska has jurisdiction over waters from 0-3 nautical miles from the baseline. The baseline generally follows the shoreline. 312 The five nations include Canada, Denmark, Norway, the Russian Federation, and the United States. See https://www.regjeringen.no/globalassets/departementene/ud/vedlegg/folkerett/declaration-on-arctic-fisheries-16-july-2015.pdf. 313 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Iceland, “The Position of Iceland on the Consultation on Arctic Fishing,” press release, July 24, 2015, http://arcticportal.org/library/press-releases/1524-the-position-of-iceland-on-the-consultation-on-arctic-fishing. 314 Prepared by Lynne Corn and Eugene Buck, Specialists in Natural Resources Policy, Resources, Science, and Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 83 polar bear was listed as threatened on May 15, 2008. The failure by the Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) to make a 90-day finding on a 2008 petition to list Pacific walrus led to submission of 60-days’ notice of a future citizen suit. However, eventually walruses were listed as candidate species under ESA;315 this status means that federal agencies carrying out actions that may affect the species must confer with FWS though they are not necessarily obliged to modify their actions. Both polar bears and walruses are heavily dependent during their life cycles on thick sea ice, making them especially susceptible to the shrinking Arctic ice cap. On December 30, 2008, the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) determined that a listing of ribbon seal as threatened or endangered was not warranted.316 On October 22, 2010, NMFS listed the southern distinct population segment (DPS) of spotted seals as threatened.317 Listing of two other DPS (Okhotsk and Bering Sea) had earlier been determined to not be warranted.318 On December 10, 2010, NMFS proposed that (1) four subspecies of ringed seal be listed as threatened,319 and (2) that two DPS of one subspecies of bearded seal be listed as threatened.320 In either terrestrial or marine environments, the extreme pace of change makes a biological response many times more difficult. For species with adaptations for a specific optimum temperature for egg development, or production of young timed to match the availability of a favored prey species, or seed dispersal in predictable fire regimes, etc., evolutionary responses may well not keep pace with the rate of change.321 While species of plants and animals farther south might migrate, drift, or be transplanted from warming habitats to more northerly sites that may continue to be suitable,322 once a terrestrial species reaches the Arctic Ocean, it is very literally at the end of the line. No more northern or colder habitat is available. The Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA; 16 U.S.C. §§1361 et seq.) protects whales, seals, walruses, and polar bears. The MMPA established a moratorium on the “taking” of marine mammals in U.S. waters and by U.S. nationals on the high seas, including the Arctic. The MMPA protects marine mammals from “clubbing, mutilation, poisoning, capture in nets, and other human actions that lead to extinction.” Under the MMPA, the Secretary of Commerce, acting through National Marine Fisheries Service, is responsible for the conservation and management of whales and seals. The Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Fish and Wildlife Service, is Industry Division. 315 Fish and Wildlife Service, “Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Review of Native Species That Are Candidates for Listing as Endangered or Threatened; Annual Notice of Findings on Resubmitted Petitions; Annual Description of Progress on Listing Actions; Proposed Rule,” 76 Federal Register 66370-66439, October 26, 2001. 316 73 Federal Register 79822-79828. 317 75 Federal Register 65239-65248. 318 74 Federal Register 53683-58696, October 20, 2009. 319 75 Federal Register 77476-77495. 320 75 Federal Register 77496-77515. 321 Among biologists, it is traditionally said that a species faced with extreme change can respond in three basic ways: “migrate, mutate, or die.” When change is rapid enough, mutation (accompanied by natural selection of individuals within the population more suited to the changed environment) may not be able to occur fast enough, leaving migration and death as the only options. The problem of response rate is more severe for species that reproduce slowly (e.g., polar bears) and less severe for species that reproduce rapidly (e.g., algae). 322 The efficacy and the effect of this tactic is often questioned, since natural migration is unlikely to involve the entire suite of species in an ecosystem (e.g., host plants might not move north (or up) as fast as their moth herbivores, nor as fast as the birds that depend on the moths). Moreover, the southerners will not find a land of sterile bare dirt—the species that are already there may be threatened themselves by the competition from the new arrivals, perhaps tipping the balance and pushing still more species toward extinction. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 84 responsible for walruses and polar bears.323 Despite the MMPA’s general moratorium on taking, the MMPA allows U.S. citizens to apply for and obtain authorization for taking small numbers of mammals incidental to activities other than commercial fishing (e.g., offshore oil and gas exploration and development) if the taking would have only a negligible impact on any marine mammal species or stock, provided that monitoring requirements and other conditions are met. Indigenous People Living in Arctic324 People have been living in the Arctic for thousands of years, and indigenous peoples developed highly specialized cultures and economies based on the physical and biological conditions of the long-isolated region. However, with trade, the influx of additional populations especially since the 19th century, and ongoing physical changes in the Arctic, indigenous populations have already experienced substantial change in their lifestyles and economies. Over the past two decades, greater political organization across indigenous populations has increased their demands for international recognition and broader rights, as well as attention to the economic, health, and safety implications of climate change in the North. Background Seven of the eight Arctic nations have indigenous peoples,325 whose predecessors were present in parts of the Arctic over 10,000 years ago, well before the arrival of peoples with European backgrounds.326 Current Arctic indigenous peoples comprise dozens of diverse cultures and speak dozens of languages from eight or more non-Indo-European language families.327 Before the arrival of Europeans, Arctic indigenous peoples lived in economies that were chiefly dependent, in varying proportions, on hunting land and marine mammals, catching salt- and fresh-water fish, herding reindeer (in Eurasia), and gathering, for their food, clothing, and other products.328 Indigenous peoples’ interaction with and knowledge of Arctic wildlife and environments has developed over millennia and is the foundation of their cultures.329 The length of time that Arctic indigenous peoples were in contact with Europeans varied across the Arctic. As recorded by Europeans, contact began as early as the 9th century CE, if not before, in Fennoscandia330 and northwestern Russia, chiefly for reasons of commerce (especially furs); it 323 Under the MMPA, both NMFS and FWS have responsibility for additional marine mammal species (e.g., manatees, sea otters, dolphins) which are not currently found in the Arctic. 324 This section was originally prepared by Roger Walke, who was a Specialist in American Indian Policy, Domestic Social Policy Division, until his retirement from CRS in October 2010. It has been updated by Jane A. Leggett, Specialist in Environmental and Energy Policy in CRS’s Resources, Science and Industry Division. 325 Arctic Human Development Report, ed. Joan Nymand Larsen et al. (Akureyri, Iceland: Stefansson Arctic Institute, 2004), p. 47; this report is subsequently cited in this section as AHDR. The seven countries are Canada, Denmark-Greenland, Finland, Norway, Russia, Sweden, and the United States. 326 John F. Hoffecker, A Prehistory of the North: Human Settlement of the Higher Latitudes (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2005), pp. 8, 81, 112-115. 327 AHDR, pp. 47, 53; David Crystal, Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language, 2nd ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), chap. 50; Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 16th ed., ed. M. Paul Lewis (Dallas: SIL International, 2009), available at http://www.ethnologue.com/. The number of languages and language families varies not only with definitions of the Arctic but with definitions of languages and language families. 328 Jim Berner et al., Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), chapter 12; this report is subsequently cited in this section as ACIA. 329 ACIA, pp. 654-655. 330 Fennoscandia refers to the Scandinavian Peninsula, Finland, the Kola Peninsula of Russia, and certain parts of Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 85 progressed mostly west-to-east across northern Asia, reaching northeastern Arctic Asia by the 17th century.331 North American Arctic indigenous peoples’ contact with Europeans started in Labrador in the 16th century and in Alaska in the 18th century, and was not completed until the early 20th century.332 Greenland’s indigenous peoples first saw European-origin peoples in the late 10th century, but those Europeans died out during the 15th or 16th century and Europeans did not return permanently until the 18th century.333 Contact led to significant changes in Arctic indigenous economies, political structures, foods, cultures, and populations, starting especially in the 20th century. For example, life expectancy among Alaska Natives has increased from 47 years in 1950 to over 69 years in 2000 (though it still lags behind that of U.S. residents overall, at 77 years).334 Also, at present, most Arctic indigenous peoples have become minorities in their countries’ Arctic areas, except in Greenland and Canada. (One source estimates that, around 2003, about 10% of an estimated 3.7 million people in the Arctic were indigenous.)335 While many Arctic indigenous communities remain heavily dependent on hunting, fishing, and herding and are more likely to depend on traditional foods than nonindigenous Arctic inhabitants,336 there is much variation. Most Arctic indigenous people may no longer consume traditional foods as their chief sources of energy and nutrition.337 Major economic change is also relatively recent but ongoing.338 Many Arctic indigenous communities have developed a mixture of traditional economic activities and wage employment.339 The economics of subsistence and globalization will be key factors in the Russia bordering on Finland. 331 Janet Martin, Treasure in the Land of Darkness: The Fur Trade and Its Significance for Medieval Russia (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), pp. 41-42; James Forsyth, A History of the Peoples of Siberia: Russia’s North Asian Colony, 1581-1990 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), pp. 69-83, 102; Lassi K. Heininen, “Different Images of the Arctic and the Circumpolar North in World Politics,” in Knowledge and Power in the Arctic, Proceedings at a Conference in Rovaniemi, April 16-18, 2007, Arctic Centre Reports 48, ed. Paula Kankaanpaa et al. (Rovaniemi, Finland: University of Lapland, Arctic Centre, 2007), p. 125. 332 James W. VanStone, “Exploration and Contact History of Western Alaska,” and David Damas, “Copper Eskimo,” and J. Garth Taylor, “Historical Ethnography of the Labrador Coast,” in Handbook of North American Indian: Vol. 5, Arctic, vol. ed. David Damas, gen. ed. William C. Sturtevant (Washington: Smithsonian, 1984), pp. 149-155, 408, 509-510. 333 Inge Kleivan, “History of Norse Greenland,” in Handbook, Vol. 5, Arctic, op. cit., pp. 549-555; Finn Gad, “Danish Greenland Policies,” in Handbook of North American Indians: Vol. 4, History of Indian-White Relations, vol. ed. Wilcomb E. Washburn, gen. ed. William C. Sturtevant (Washington: Smithsonian, 1988), p. 110. 334 Parkinson, Alan J. The Arctic Human Health Initiative. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2006. 335 AHDR, pp. 19, 29. Estimates of Arctic indigenous populations are complicated by varying definitions not only of the Arctic but also of indigenous peoples; for instance, Russia does not count some non-European Arctic ethnic groups, such as the Yakut, as “indigenous minorities” (see “Peoples of the Arctic: Characteristics of Human Populations Relevant to Pollution Issues,” in AMAP Assessment Report: Arctic Pollution Issues, ed. Simon J. Wilson et al. (Oslo: Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme, 1998), pp. 167-169; this report is subsequently cited in this section as AMAP 1998. 336 AMAP 1998, chapter 5; see also Birger Poppel et al., SLiCA Results, Survey of Living Conditions in the Arctic (Anchorage: Institute of Social and Economic Research, University of Alaska Anchorage, 2007), pp. 4-7, http://www.arcticlivingconditions.org. 337 Annika E. Nilson and Henry P. Huntington, Arctic Pollution 2009 (Oslo: Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme, 2009), pp. 39-41; this report is subsequently cited in this section as AMAP 2009. 338 ACIA, p. 1000. 339 SLiCA Results, op. cit., pp. v, 4-8. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 86 effects of climate change on Arctic indigenous peoples, and on their reactions to Arctic climate change. Arctic indigenous peoples’ current political structures vary, as do their relationships with their national governments. Some indigenous groups govern their own unique land areas within the national structure, as in the United States and Canada; others have special representative bodies, such as the Saami parliaments in Norway, Finland, and Sweden;340 a few areas have general governments with indigenous majorities, such as Greenland (a member country of Denmark), Nunavut territory in Canada, and the North Slope and Northwest Arctic boroughs in Alaska.341 Control of land, through claims and ownership, also varies among Arctic indigenous peoples, as do rights to fishing, hunting, and resources.342 Arctic indigenous peoples’ political relationships to their national and local governments, and their ownership or claims regarding land, are also significant factors in the responses to Arctic climate change by the indigenous peoples and by Arctic nations’ governments. Effects of Climate Change Arctic climate change is expected to affect the economies, population, subsistence, health, infrastructure, societies, and cultures of Arctic indigenous peoples. Changes in sea ice and sea level, permafrost, tundra, weather, and vegetation distributions, as well as increased commercial shipping, mineral extraction, and tourism, will affect the distribution of land and sea mammals, of freshwater and marine fish, and of forage for reindeer. These will in turn affect traditional subsistence activities and related indigenous lifestyles.343 Arctic indigenous peoples’ harvesting of animals is likely to become riskier and less predictable, which may increase food insecurity, change diets, and increase dependency on outside, nontraditional foods.344 Food cellars in many locations have thawed during summers, threatening food safety. Related health risks of diabetes, obesity, and mental illness have been associated with these changes.345 Sea, shoreline ice, and permafrost changes have damaged infrastructure and increased coastal and inland erosion, especially in Alaska, where GAO found in 2003 that “coastal villages are becoming more susceptible to flooding and erosion caused in part by rising temperatures.”346 In response, Congress funded the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to conduct a Baseline Erosion Assessment that identified and prioritized among the 178 communities identified at risk from erosion.347 (Risks from flooding were not examined.) GAO concluded in 2009 that many Native villages must relocate, but even those facing imminent threats have been impeded by various barriers, including difficulties identifying appropriate new sites, piecemeal programs for state and 340 AHDR, p. 232. 341 AHDR, chapter 4, and pp. 232-233. 342 AHDR, chapters 6-7, and pp. 232-233. 343 ACIA, pp. 1000-1001, 1004. 344 ACIA, pp. 1000-1001, 1004. 345 Parkinson, Alan J. The Arctic Human Health Initiative. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2006; Brubaker, Michael, James Berner, Raj Chavan, and John Warren. “Climate Change and Health Effects in Northwest Alaska.” Global Health Action 4 (October 18, 2011). 346 U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO), Alaska Native Villages: Villages Affected by Flooding and Erosion Have Difficulty Qualifying for Federal Assistance, GAO-04-895T, June 29, 2004, p. i, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04895t.pdf. See also, Government Accountability Office, Alaska Native Villages: Most Are Affected by Flooding and Erosion, but Few Qualify for Federal Assistance, GAO-04-142, December 12, 2003, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04142.pdf. 347 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Alaska Baseline Erosion Assessment (BEA), March 2009. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 87 federal assistance, and obstacles to eligibility for certain federal programs.348 The Alaska Federation of Natives placed among its 2010 federal priorities a request to Congress to mitigate flooding and erosion in Alaska Native villages and to fund relocation of villages where necessary.349 However, “the cost is extraordinary,” acknowledges Senator Lisa Murkowski.350 Oil, gas, and mineral exploration and development are expected to increase, as are other economic activities, such as forestry and tourism, and these are expected to increase economic opportunities for all Arctic residents, including indigenous peoples.351 Pressures to increase participation in the wage economy, however, may speed up changes in indigenous cultures. Increased economic opportunities may also lead to a rise in the nonindigenous population, which may further change the circumstances of indigenous cultures. Some representatives of Arctic indigenous people have related a “conflicting desire between combating climate change and embracing the potential for economic growth through foreign investment.”352 Although important advances in public health have occurred in indigenous communities over past decades, some health problems may increase with continued Arctic climate change. Economic development may exacerbate Arctic pollution problems, including higher exposure to mercury, air pollution, and food contamination. The influx and redistribution of contaminants in the air, oceans, and land may change in ways that are now poorly understood.353 Warmer temperatures and longer warm seasons may increase insect- and wildlife-borne diseases.354 Climate change may lead to damage to water and sanitation systems, reducing protection against waterborne diseases.355 Changes in Arctic indigenous cultures may increase mental stress and behavioral problems.356 348 GAO, Alaska Native Villages: Limited Progress Has Been Made on Relocating Villages Threatened by Flooding and Erosion, June 3, 2009. 349 Alaska Federation of Natives, Human Resources Committee, 2010 Federal Priorities (Anchorage: Alaska Federation of Natives, 2010), pp. 22-23, available at https://www.nativefederation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/2010-afn-federal-priorities.pdf. See also, Government Accountability Office, Alaska Native Villages: Limited Progress Has Been Made on Relocating Villages Threatened by Flooding and Erosion, GAO-09-551, June 3, 2009, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09551.pdf. For a more detailed anecdote, see a 2012 interview with Brice Eningowuk, Shishmaref Erosion and Relocation Committee member at Shearer, Christine. “Climate Crisis: Alaskan Village Shishmaref Sinking Into the Sea.” Imagined Magazine, July 8, 2012, http://imaginedmag.com/2012/07/climate-crisis-alaskan-village-shishmaref-sinking-into-the-sea/. 350 Press Office of Senator Lisa Murkowski. “Murkowski Urges Greater Tribal Consultation from Administration; Senator Spotlights ‘Monumental’ Climate Struggles Faced by Alaska Natives, Coastal Communities,” July 19, 2012. 351 ACIA, pp. 1001, 1004. 352 Aqqaluk Lynge, Chair, Inuit Circumpolar Council, quoted in Stephanie McFeeters, “Lynge talks future of Inuit people,” The Dartmouth, February 8, 2012. 353 See, for example, “Health: Increased Bacterial Loads in Potable Water Could Have Significant Health Effects on Indigenous People From the Arctic to Uganda, Says Vanier Scholar.” National Aboriginal Health Organization (NAHO), February 17, 2012. http://www.naho.ca/blog/2012/02/17/health-increased-bacterial-loads-in-potable-water-could-have-significant-health-effects-on-indigenous-people-from-the-arctic-to-uganda-says-vanier-scholar/; or, Kallenborn et al., Combined Effects of Selected Pollutants and Climate Change in the Arctic Environment. Oslo, Norway: Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP), Arctic Council, 2011. 354 AMAP Assessment 2009: Human Health in the Arctic, ed. Simon J. Wilson and Carolyn Symon (Oslo: Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme, 2009), pp. 4-6, 143. 355 Brubaker, Michael, James Berner, Raj Chavan, and John Warren. “Climate Change and Health Effects in Northwest Alaska.” Global Health Action 4 (October 18, 2011); John Warren, “Climate change could affect human health,” Mukluk Telegraph, January/February 2005, pp. 5-6. 356 John Warren, “Climate change could affect human health,” Mukluk Telegraph, January/February 2005, pp. 5-6. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 88 The response to climate change by Arctic indigenous peoples has included international activities by Arctic indigenous organizations and advocacy before their national governments. As one report noted, “the rise of solidarity among indigenous peoples organizations in the region is surely a development to be reckoned with by all those interested in policy issues in the Arctic.”357 Six national or international indigenous organizations are permanent participants of the Arctic Council, the regional intergovernmental forum.358 Due in part to advocacy by Arctic indigenous people, the United Nations General Assembly adopted in 2007 the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.359 In April 2009, the Inuit Circumpolar Council (an organization of Inuit in the Arctic regions of Alaska, Canada, Greenland, and Russia) hosted in Alaska the worldwide “Indigenous Peoples Global Summit on Climate Change.”360 The conference report, forwarded to the Copenhagen Conference of the Parties of the U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change (December 2009), noted “accelerating” climate change caused by “unsustainable development” and, among several recommendations, called for a greater indigenous role in national and international decisions on climate change, including a greater role for indigenous knowledge in climate change research, monitoring, and mitigation.361 CRS Reports on Specific Arctic-Related Issues CRS In Focus IF10740, The Nordic Countries and U.S. Relations, by Kristin Archick CRS Insight IN11161, Greenland, Denmark, and U.S. Relations, by Kristin Archick CRS Report RL34391, Coast Guard Polar Security Cutter (Polar Icebreaker) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke CRS Report RL33872, Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR): An Overview, by M. Lynne Corn, Michael Ratner, and Laura B. Comay CRS Report RL32838, Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR): Votes and Legislative Actions Since the 95th Congress, by M. Lynne Corn and Beth Cook CRS Report R45192, Oil and Gas Activities Within the National Wildlife Refuge System, by R. Eliot Crafton, Laura B. Comay, and Marc Humphries CRS Report RL33705, Oil Spills: Background and Governance, by Jonathan L. Ramseur 357 AHDR, p. 235. 358 See http://www.arctic-council.org/. The six organizations are the Aleut International Association, Arctic Athabaskan Council, Gwich’in Council International, Inuit Circumpolar Council, RAIPON (Russian Association of Indigenous Peoples of the North), and Saami Council. 359 United Nations, Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, Resolution A/RES/61/295, at http://www.un-documents.net/a61r295.htm. 360 See http://www.indigenoussummit.com/servlet/content/home.html. 361 K. Galloway-McLean et al., Report of the Indigenous Peoples’ Global Summit on Climate Change: 20-24 April 2009, Anchorage, Alaska (Darwin, Australia: United Nations University—Traditional Knowledge Initiative, 2009), pp. 5-7; available at http://www.indigenoussummit.com/servlet/content/home.html. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 89 Appendix A. Arctic Research and Policy Act (ARPA) of 1984 (Title I of P.L. 98-373) The text of the Arctic Research and Policy Act (ARPA) of 1984 (Title I of P.L. 98-373 of July 31, 1984)362 is as follows: TITLE I – ARCTIC RESEARCH AND POLICY SHORT TITLE SEC. 101. This title may be cited as the “Arctic Research and Policy Act of 1984”. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES SEC. 102. (a) The Congress finds and declares that- (1) the Arctic, onshore and offshore, contains vital energy resources that can reduce the Nation’s dependence on foreign oil and improve the national balance of payments; (2) as the Nation’s only common border with the Soviet Union, the Arctic is critical to national defense; (3) the renewable resources of the Arctic, specifically fish and other seafood, represent one of the Nation’s greatest commercial assets; (4) Arctic conditions directly affect global weather patterns and must be understood in order to promote better agricultural management throughout the United States; (5) industrial pollution not originating in the Arctic region collects in the polar air mass, has the potential to disrupt global weather patterns, and must be controlled through international cooperation and consultation; (6) the Arctic is a natural laboratory for research into human health and adaptation, physical and psychological, to climates of extreme cold and isolation and may provide information crucial for future defense needs; (7) atmospheric conditions peculiar to the Arctic make the Arctic a unique testing ground for research into high latitude communications, which is likely to be crucial for future defense needs; (8) Arctic marine technology is critical to cost-effective recovery and transportation of energy resources and to the national defense; (9) the United States has important security, economic, and environmental interests in developing and maintaining a fleet of icebreaking vessels capable of operating effectively in the heavy ice regions of the Arctic; (10) most Arctic-rim countries, particularly the Soviet Union, possess Arctic technologies far more advanced than those currently available in the United States; (11) Federal Arctic research is fragmented and uncoordinated at the present time, leading to the neglect of certain areas of research and to unnecessary duplication of effort in other areas of research; (12) improved logistical coordination and support for Arctic research and better dissemination of research data and information is necessary to increase the efficiency and utility of national Arctic research efforts; 362 Title II of P.L. 98-373 is the National Critical Materials Act of 1984. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 90 (13) a comprehensive national policy and program plan to organize and fund currently neglected scientific research with respect to the Arctic is necessary to fulfill national objectives in Arctic research; (14) the Federal Government, in cooperation with State and local governments, should focus its efforts on the collection and characterization of basic data related to biological, materials, geophysical, social, and behavioral phenomena in the Arctic; (15) research into the long-range health, environmental, and social effects of development in the Arctic is necessary to mitigate the adverse consequences of that development to the land and its residents; (16) Arctic research expands knowledge of the Arctic, which can enhance the lives of Arctic residents, increase opportunities for international cooperation among Arctic-rim countries, and facilitate the formulation of national policy for the Arctic; and (17) the Alaskan Arctic provides an essential habitat for marine mammals, migratory waterfowl, and other forms of wildlife which are important to the Nation and which are essential to Arctic residents. (b) The purposes of this title are- (1) to establish national policy, priorities, and goals and to provide a Federal program plan for basic and applied scientific research with respect to the Arctic, including natural resources and materials, physical, biological and health sciences, and social and behavioral sciences; (2) to establish an Arctic Research Commission to promote Arctic research and to recommend Arctic research policy; (3) to designate the National Science Foundation as the lead agency responsible for implementing Arctic research policy; and (4) to establish an Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee to develop a national Arctic research policy and a five year plan to implement that policy. ARCTIC RESEARCH COMMISSION SEC. 103. (a) The President shall establish an Arctic Research Commission (hereafter referred to as the “Commission”). (b)(1) The Commission shall be composed of five members appointed by the President, with the Director of the National Science Foundation serving as a nonvoting, ex officio member. The members appointed by the President shall include- (A) three members appointed from among individuals from academic or other research institutions with expertise in areas of research relating to the Arctic, including the physical, biological, health, environmental, social, and behavioral sciences; (B) one member appointed from among indigenous residents of the Arctic who are representative of the needs and interests of Arctic residents and who live in areas directly affected by Arctic resource development; and (C) one member appointed from among individuals familiar with the Arctic and representative of the needs and interests of private industry undertaking resource development in the Arctic. (2) The President shall designate one of the appointed members of the Commission to be chairperson of the Commission. (c)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the term of office of each member of the Commission appointed under subsection (b)(1) shall be four years. (2) Of the members of the Commission originally appointed under subsection (b)(1)- Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 91 (A) one shall be appointed for a term of two years; (B) two shall be appointed for a term of three years; and (C) two shall be appointed for a term of four years. (3) Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Commission shall be filled, after notice of the vacancy is published in the Federal Register, in the manner provided by the preceding provisions of this section, for the remainder of the unexpired term. (4) A member may serve after the expiration of the member’s term of office until the President appoints a successor. (5) A member may serve consecutive terms beyond the member’s original appointment. (d)(1) Members of the Commission may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by section 5703 of title 5, United States Code. A member of the Commission not presently employed for compensation shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the rate for GS-16 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code, for each day the member is engaged in the actual performance of his duties as a member of the Commission, not to exceed 90 days of service each year. Except for the purposes of chapter 81 of title 5 (relating to compensation for work injuries) and chapter 171 of title 28 (relating to tort claims), a member of the Commission shall not be considered an employee of the United States for any purpose. (2) The Commission shall meet at the call of its Chairman or a majority of its members. (3) Each Federal agency referred to in section 107(b) may designate a representative to participate as an observer with the Commission. These representatives shall report to and advise the Commission on the activities relating to Arctic research of their agencies. (4) The Commission shall conduct at least one public meeting in the State of Alaska annually. DUTIES OF COMMISSION SEC. 104. (a) The Commission shall- (1) develop and recommend an integrated national Arctic research policy; (2) in cooperation with the Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee established under section 107, assist in establishing a national Arctic research program plan to implement the Arctic research policy; (3) facilitate cooperation between the Federal Government and State and local governments with respect to Arctic research; (4) review Federal research programs in the Arctic and suggest improvements in coordination among programs; (5) recommend methods to improve logistical planning and support for Arctic research as may be appropriate and in accordance with the findings and purposes of this title; (6) suggest methods for improving efficient sharing and dissemination of data and information on the Arctic among interested public and private institutions; (7) offer other recommendations and advice to the Interagency Committee established under section 107 as it may find appropriate; and (8) cooperate with the Governor of the State of Alaska and with agencies and organizations of that State which the Governor may designate with respect to the formulation of Arctic research policy. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 92 (b) Not later than January 31 of each year, the Commission shall- (1) publish a statement of goals and objectives with respect to Arctic research to guide the Interagency Committee established under section 107 in the performance of its duties; and (2) submit to the President and to the Congress a report describing the activities and accomplishments of the Commission during the immediately preceding fiscal year. COOPERATION WITH THE COMMISSION SEC. 105. (a)(1) The Commission may acquire from the head of any Federal agency unclassified data, reports, and other nonproprietary information with respect to Arctic research in the possession of the agency which the Commission considers useful in the discharge of its duties. (2) Each agency shall cooperate with the Commission and furnish all data, reports, and other information requested by the Commission to the extent permitted by law; except that no agency need furnish any information which it is permitted to withhold under section 552 of title 5, United States Code. (b) With the consent of the appropriate agency head, the Commission may utilize the facilities and services of any Federal agency to the extent that the facilities and services are needed for the establishment and development of an Arctic research policy, upon reimbursement to be agreed upon by the Commission and the agency head and taking every feasible step to avoid duplication of effort. (c) All Federal agencies shall consult with the Commission before undertaking major Federal actions relating to Arctic research. ADMINISTRATION OF THE COMMISSION SEC. 106. The Commission may- (1) in accordance with the civil service laws and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, appoint and fix the compensation of an Executive Director and necessary additional staff personnel, but not to exceed a total of seven compensated personnel; (2) procure temporary and intermittent services as authorized by section 3109 of title 5, United States Code; (3) enter into contracts and procure supplies, services, and personal property; and (4) enter into agreements with the General Services Administration for the procurement of necessary financial and administrative services, for which payment shall be made by reimbursement from funds of the Commission in amounts to be agreed upon by the Commission and the Administrator of the General Services Administration. LEAD AGENCY AND INTERAGENCY ARCTIC RESEARCH POLICY COMMITTEE SEC. 107. (a) The National Science Foundation is designated as the lead agency responsible for implementing Arctic research policy, and the Director of the National Science Foundation shall insure that the requirements of section 108 are fulfilled. (b)(1) The President shall establish an Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee (hereinafter referred to as the “Interagency Committee”). (2) The Interagency Committee shall be composed of representatives of the following Federal agencies or offices: (A) the National Science Foundation; (B) the Department of Commerce; Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 93 (C) the Department of Defense; (D) the Department of Energy; (E) the Department of the Interior; (F) the Department of State; (G) the Department of Transportation; (H) the Department of Health and Human Services; (I) the National Aeronautics and Space Administration; (J) the Environmental Protection Agency; and (K) any other agency or office deemed appropriate. (3) The representative of the National Science Foundation shall serve as the Chairperson of the Interagency Committee. DUTIES OF THE INTERAGENCY COMMITTEE SEC. 108. (a) The Interagency Committee shall- (1) survey Arctic research conducted by Federal, State, and local agencies, universities, and other public and private institutions to help determine priorities for future Arctic research, including natural resources and materials, physical and biological sciences, and social and behavioral sciences; (2) work with the Commission to develop and establish an integrated national Arctic research policy that will guide Federal agencies in developing and implementing their research programs in the Arctic; (3) consult with the Commission on- (A) the development of the national Arctic research policy and the 5-year plan implementing the policy; (B) Arctic research programs of Federal agencies; (C) recommendations of the Commission on future Arctic research; and (D) guidelines for Federal agencies for awarding and administering Arctic research grants; (4) develop a 5-year plan to implement the national policy, as provided for in section 109; (5) provide the necessary coordination, data, and assistance for the preparation of a single integrated, coherent, and multiagency budget request for Arctic research as provided for in section 110; (6) facilitate cooperation between the Federal Government and State and local governments in Arctic research, and recommend the undertaking of neglected areas of research in accordance with the findings and purposes of this title; (7) coordinate and promote cooperative Arctic scientific research programs with other nations, subject to the foreign policy guidance of the Secretary of State; (8) cooperate with the Governor of the State of Alaska in fulfilling its responsibilities under this title; (9) promote Federal interagency coordination of all Arctic research activities, including- (A) logistical planning and coordination; and (B) the sharing of data and information associated with Arctic research, subject to section 552 of title 5, United States Code; and Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 94 (10) provide public notice of its meetings and an opportunity for the public to participate in the development and implementation of national Arctic research policy. (b) Not later than January 31, 1986, and biennially thereafter, the Interagency Committee shall submit to the Congress through the President, a brief, concise report containing- (1) a statement of the activities and accomplishments of the Interagency Committee since its last report; and (2) a description of the activities of the Commission, detailing with particularity the recommendations of the Commission with respect to Federal activities in Arctic research. 5-YEAR ARCTIC RESEARCH PLAN SEC. 109. (a) The Interagency Committee, in consultation with the Commission, the Governor of the State of Alaska, the residents of the Arctic, the private sector, and public interest groups, shall prepare a comprehensive 5-year program plan (hereinafter referred to as the “Plan”) for the overall Federal effort in Arctic research. The Plan shall be prepared and submitted to the President for transmittal to the Congress within one year after the enactment of this Act and shall be revised biennially thereafter. (b) The Plan shall contain but need not be limited to the following elements: (1) an assessment of national needs and problems regarding the Arctic and the research necessary to address those needs or problems; (2) a statement of the goals and objectives of the Interagency Committee for national Arctic research; (3) a detailed listing of all existing Federal programs relating to Arctic research, including the existing goals, funding levels for each of the 5 following fiscal years, and the funds currently being expended to conduct the programs; (4) recommendations for necessary program changes and other proposals to meet the requirements of the policy and goals as set forth by the Commission and in the Plan as currently in effect; and (5) a description of the actions taken by the Interagency Committee to coordinate the budget review process in order to ensure interagency coordination and cooperation in (A) carrying out Federal Arctic research programs, and (B) eliminating unnecessary duplication of effort among these programs. COORDINATION AND REVIEW OF BUDGET REQUESTS SEC. 110. (a) The Office of Science and Technology Policy shall- (1) review all agency and department budget requests related to the Arctic transmitted pursuant to section 108(a)(5), in accordance with the national Arctic research policy and the 5-year program under section 108(a)(2) and section 109, respectively; and (2) consult closely with the Interagency Committee and the Commission to guide the Office of Science and Technology Policy’s efforts. (b)(1) The Office of Management and Budget shall consider all Federal agency requests for research related to the Arctic as one integrated, coherent, and multiagency request which shall be reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget prior to submission of the President’s annual budget request for its adherence to the Plan. The Commission shall, after submission of the President’s annual budget request, review the request and report to Congress on adherence to the Plan. (2) The Office of Management and Budget shall seek to facilitate planning for the design, procurement, maintenance, deployment, and operations of icebreakers needed to provide a platform for Arctic research by allocating all funds necessary to support icebreaking Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 95 operations, except for recurring incremental costs associated with specific projects, to the Coast Guard. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS; NEW SPENDING AUTHORITY SEC. 111. (a) There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for carrying out this title. (b) Any new spending authority (within the meaning of section 401 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974) which is provided under this title shall be effective for any fiscal year only to such extent or in such amounts as may be provided in appropriation Acts. DEFINITION SEC. 112. As used in this title, the term “Arctic” means all United States and foreign territory north of the Arctic Circle and all United States territory north and west of the boundary formed by the Porcupine, Yukon, and Kuskokwim Rivers; all contiguous seas, including the Arctic Ocean and the Beaufort, Bering, and Chukchi Seas; and the Aleutian chain. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 96 Appendix B. P.L. 101-609 of 1990, Amending Arctic Research and Policy Act (ARPA) of 1984 The Arctic Research and Policy Act (ARPA) of 1984 (see Appendix A) was amended by P.L. 101-609 of November 16, 1990. The text of P.L. 101-609 is as follows: SECTION 1. Except as specifically provided in this Act, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed as an amendment to, or repeal of a provision, the reference shall be deemed to be made to the Arctic Research and Policy Act of 1984. SEC. 2. Section 103(b)(1) (15 U.S.C. 4102(b)(1)) is amended— (1) in the text above clause (A), by striking out ‘five’ and inserting in lieu thereof ‘seven’; (2) in clause (A), by striking out ‘three’ and inserting in lieu thereof ‘four’; and (3) in clause (C), by striking out ‘one member’ and inserting in lieu thereof ‘two members’. SEC. 3. Section 103(d)(1) (15 U.S.C. 4102(d)(1)) is amended by striking out ‘GS-16’ and inserting in lieu thereof ‘GS-18’. SEC. 4. (a) Section 104(a) (15 U.S.C. 4102(a)) is amended— (1) in paragraph (4), by striking out `suggest’ and inserting in lieu thereof `recommend’; (2) in paragraph (6), by striking out `suggest’ and inserting in lieu thereof `recommend’; (3) in paragraph (7), by striking out `and’ at the end thereof; (4) in paragraph (8), by striking out the period and inserting in lieu thereof a semicolon; and (5) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs: ‘(9) recommend to the Interagency Committee the means for developing international scientific cooperation in the Arctic; and ‘(10) not later than January 31, 1991, and every 2 years thereafter, publish a statement of goals and objectives with respect to Arctic research to guide the Interagency Committee established under section 107 in the performance of its duties.’. (b) Section 104(b) is amended to read as follows: ‘(b) Not later than January 31 of each year, the Commission shall submit to the President and to the Congress a report describing the activities and accomplishments of the Commission during the immediately preceding fiscal year.’. SEC. 5. Section 106 (15 U.S.C. 4105) is amended— (1) in paragraph (3), by striking out ‘and’ at the end thereof; (2) in paragraph (4), by striking out the period at the end thereof and inserting in lieu thereof; and’; and (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ‘(5) appoint, and accept without compensation the services of, scientists and engineering specialists to be advisors to the Commission. Each advisor may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by section 5703 of title 5, United States Code. Except for the purposes of chapter 81 of title 5 (relating to compensation for work injuries) and chapter 171 of title 28 (relating to tort claims) of the United States Code, an advisor appointed under this paragraph shall not be considered an employee of the United States for any purpose.’ Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 97 SEC. 6. Subsection (b)(2) of section 108 (15 U.S.C. 4107(b)(2)) is amended to read as follows: ‘(2) a statement detailing with particularity the recommendations of the Commission with respect to Federal interagency activities in Arctic research and the disposition and responses to those recommendations.’ Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 98 Appendix C. January 2009 Arctic Policy Directive (NSPD 66/HSPD 25) On January 12, 2009, the George W. Bush Administration released a presidential directive establishing a new U.S. policy for the Arctic region. The directive, dated January 9, 2009, was issued as National Security Presidential Directive 66/Homeland Security Presidential Directive 25 (NSPD 66/HSPD 25). The text of NSPD 66/HSPD 25 is as follows: SUBJECT: Arctic Region Policy I. PURPOSE A. This directive establishes the policy of the United States with respect to the Arctic region and directs related implementation actions. This directive supersedes Presidential Decision Directive/NSC-26 (PDD-26; issued 1994) with respect to Arctic policy but not Antarctic policy; PDD-26 remains in effect for Antarctic policy only. B. This directive shall be implemented in a manner consistent with the Constitution and laws of the United States, with the obligations of the United States under the treaties and other international agreements to which the United States is a party, and with customary international law as recognized by the United States, including with respect to the law of the sea. II. BACKGROUND A. The United States is an Arctic nation, with varied and compelling interests in that region. This directive takes into account several developments, including, among others: 1. Altered national policies on homeland security and defense; 2. The effects of climate change and increasing human activity in the Arctic region; 3. The establishment and ongoing work of the Arctic Council; and 4. A growing awareness that the Arctic region is both fragile and rich in resources. III. POLICY A. It is the policy of the United States to: 1. Meet national security and homeland security needs relevant to the Arctic region; 2. Protect the Arctic environment and conserve its biological resources; 3. Ensure that natural resource management and economic development in the region are environmentally sustainable; 4. Strengthen institutions for cooperation among the eight Arctic nations (the United States, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, the Russian Federation, and Sweden); 5. Involve the Arctic’s indigenous communities in decisions that affect them; and 6. Enhance scientific monitoring and research into local, regional, and global environmental issues. B. National Security and Homeland Security Interests in the Arctic 1. The United States has broad and fundamental national security interests in the Arctic region and is prepared to operate either independently or in conjunction with other states to safeguard these interests. These interests include such matters as missile defense and early warning; deployment of sea and air systems for strategic sealift, strategic deterrence, Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 99 maritime presence, and maritime security operations; and ensuring freedom of navigation and overflight. 2. The United States also has fundamental homeland security interests in preventing terrorist attacks and mitigating those criminal or hostile acts that could increase the United States vulnerability to terrorism in the Arctic region. 3. The Arctic region is primarily a maritime domain; as such, existing policies and authorities relating to maritime areas continue to apply, including those relating to law enforcement.[1] Human activity in the Arctic region is increasing and is projected to increase further in coming years. This requires the United States to assert a more active and influential national presence to protect its Arctic interests and to project sea power throughout the region. 4. The United States exercises authority in accordance with lawful claims of United States sovereignty, sovereign rights, and jurisdiction in the Arctic region, including sovereignty within the territorial sea, sovereign rights and jurisdiction within the United States exclusive economic zone and on the continental shelf, and appropriate control in the United States contiguous zone. 5. Freedom of the seas is a top national priority. The Northwest Passage is a strait used for international navigation, and the Northern Sea Route includes straits used for international navigation; the regime of transit passage applies to passage through those straits. Preserving the rights and duties relating to navigation and overflight in the Arctic region supports our ability to exercise these rights throughout the world, including through strategic straits. 6. Implementation: In carrying out this policy as it relates to national security and homeland security interests in the Arctic, the Secretaries of State, Defense, and Homeland Security, in coordination with heads of other relevant executive departments and agencies, shall: a. Develop greater capabilities and capacity, as necessary, to protect United States air, land, and sea borders in the Arctic region; b. Increase Arctic maritime domain awareness in order to protect maritime commerce, critical infrastructure, and key resources; c. Preserve the global mobility of United States military and civilian vessels and aircraft throughout the Arctic region; d. Project a sovereign United States maritime presence in the Arctic in support of essential United States interests; and e. Encourage the peaceful resolution of disputes in the Arctic region. C. International Governance 1. The United States participates in a variety of fora, international organizations, and bilateral contacts that promote United States interests in the Arctic. These include the Arctic Council, the International Maritime Organization (IMO), wildlife conservation and management agreements, and many other mechanisms. As the Arctic changes and human activity in the region increases, the United States and other governments should consider, as appropriate, new international arrangements or enhancements to existing arrangements. 2. The Arctic Council has produced positive results for the United States by working within its limited mandate of environmental protection and sustainable development. Its subsidiary bodies, with help from many United States agencies, have developed and undertaken projects on a wide range of topics. The Council also provides a beneficial venue for interaction with indigenous groups. It is the position of the United States that the Arctic Council should remain a high-level forum devoted to issues within its current mandate and not be transformed into a formal international organization, particularly one with assessed Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 100 contributions. The United States is nevertheless open to updating the structure of the Council, including consolidation of, or making operational changes to, its subsidiary bodies, to the extent such changes can clearly improve the Council’s work and are consistent with the general mandate of the Council. 3. The geopolitical circumstances of the Arctic region differ sufficiently from those of the Antarctic region such that an “Arctic Treaty” of broad scope—along the lines of the Antarctic Treaty—is not appropriate or necessary. 4. The Senate should act favorably on U.S. accession to the U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea promptly, to protect and advance U.S. interests, including with respect to the Arctic. Joining will serve the national security interests of the United States, including the maritime mobility of our Armed Forces worldwide. It will secure U.S. sovereign rights over extensive marine areas, including the valuable natural resources they contain. Accession will promote U.S. interests in the environmental health of the oceans. And it will give the United States a seat at the table when the rights that are vital to our interests are debated and interpreted. 5. Implementation: In carrying out this policy as it relates to international governance, the Secretary of State, in coordination with heads of other relevant executive departments and agencies, shall: a. Continue to cooperate with other countries on Arctic issues through the United Nations (U.N.) and its specialized agencies, as well as through treaties such as the U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, the Convention on Long Range Transboundary Air Pollution and its protocols, and the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer; b. Consider, as appropriate, new or enhanced international arrangements for the Arctic to address issues likely to arise from expected increases in human activity in that region, including shipping, local development and subsistence, exploitation of living marine resources, development of energy and other resources, and tourism; c. Review Arctic Council policy recommendations developed within the ambit of the Council’s scientific reviews and ensure the policy recommendations are subject to review by Arctic governments; and d. Continue to seek advice and consent of the United States Senate to accede to the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention. D. Extended Continental Shelf and Boundary Issues 1. Defining with certainty the area of the Arctic seabed and subsoil in which the United States may exercise its sovereign rights over natural resources such as oil, natural gas, methane hydrates, minerals, and living marine species is critical to our national interests in energy security, resource management, and environmental protection. The most effective way to achieve international recognition and legal certainty for our extended continental shelf is through the procedure available to States Parties to the U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea. 2. The United States and Canada have an unresolved boundary in the Beaufort Sea. United States policy recognizes a boundary in this area based on equidistance. The United States recognizes that the boundary area may contain oil, natural gas, and other resources. 3. The United States and Russia are abiding by the terms of a maritime boundary treaty concluded in 1990, pending its entry into force. The United States is prepared to enter the agreement into force once ratified by the Russian Federation. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 101 4. Implementation: In carrying out this policy as it relates to extended continental shelf and boundary issues, the Secretary of State, in coordination with heads of other relevant executive departments and agencies, shall: a. Take all actions necessary to establish the outer limit of the continental shelf appertaining to the United States, in the Arctic and in other regions, to the fullest extent permitted under international law; b. Consider the conservation and management of natural resources during the process of delimiting the extended continental shelf; and c. Continue to urge the Russian Federation to ratify the 1990 United States-Russia maritime boundary agreement. E. Promoting International Scientific Cooperation 1. Scientific research is vital for the promotion of United States interests in the Arctic region. Successful conduct of U.S. research in the Arctic region requires access throughout the Arctic Ocean and to terrestrial sites, as well as viable international mechanisms for sharing access to research platforms and timely exchange of samples, data, and analyses. Better coordination with the Russian Federation, facilitating access to its domain, is particularly important. 2. The United States promotes the sharing of Arctic research platforms with other countries in support of collaborative research that advances fundamental understanding of the Arctic region in general and potential Arctic change in particular. This could include collaboration with bodies such as the Nordic Council and the European Polar Consortium, as well as with individual nations. 3. Accurate prediction of future environmental and climate change on a regional basis, and the delivery of near real-time information to end-users, requires obtaining, analyzing, and disseminating accurate data from the entire Arctic region, including both paleoclimatic data and observational data. The United States has made significant investments in the infrastructure needed to collect environmental data in the Arctic region, including the establishment of portions of an Arctic circumpolar observing network through a partnership among United States agencies, academic collaborators, and Arctic residents. The United States promotes active involvement of all Arctic nations in these efforts in order to advance scientific understanding that could provide the basis for assessing future impacts and proposed response strategies. 4. United States platforms capable of supporting forefront research in the Arctic Ocean, including portions expected to be ice-covered for the foreseeable future, as well as seasonally ice-free regions, should work with those of other nations through the establishment of an Arctic circumpolar observing network. All Arctic nations are members of the Group on Earth Observations partnership, which provides a framework for organizing an international approach to environmental observations in the region. In addition, the United States recognizes that academic and research institutions are vital partners in promoting and conducting Arctic research. 5. Implementation: In carrying out this policy as it relates to promoting scientific international cooperation, the Secretaries of State, the Interior, and Commerce and the Director of the National Science Foundation, in coordination with heads of other relevant executive departments and agencies, shall: a. Continue to play a leadership role in research throughout the Arctic region; b. Actively promote full and appropriate access by scientists to Arctic research sites through bilateral and multilateral measures and by other means; c. Lead the effort to establish an effective Arctic circumpolar observing network with broad partnership from other relevant nations; Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 102 d. Promote regular meetings of Arctic science ministers or research council heads to share information concerning scientific research opportunities and to improve coordination of international Arctic research programs; e. Work with the Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee (IARPC) to promote research that is strategically linked to U.S. policies articulated in this directive, with input from the Arctic Research Commission; and f. Strengthen partnerships with academic and research institutions and build upon the relationships these institutions have with their counterparts in other nations. F. Maritime Transportation in the Arctic Region 1. The United States priorities for maritime transportation in the Arctic region are: a. To facilitate safe, secure, and reliable navigation; b. To protect maritime commerce; and c. To protect the environment. 2. Safe, secure, and environmentally sound maritime commerce in the Arctic region depends on infrastructure to support shipping activity, search and rescue capabilities, short- and long-range aids to navigation, high-risk area vessel-traffic management, iceberg warnings and other sea ice information, effective shipping standards, and measures to protect the marine environment. In addition, effective search and rescue in the Arctic will require local, State, Federal, tribal, commercial, volunteer, scientific, and multinational cooperation. 3. Working through the International Maritime Organization (IMO), the United States promotes strengthening existing measures and, as necessary, developing new measures to improve the safety and security of maritime transportation, as well as to protect the marine environment in the Arctic region. These measures may include ship routing and reporting systems, such as traffic separation and vessel traffic management schemes in Arctic chokepoints; updating and strengthening of the Guidelines for Ships Operating in Arctic Ice-Covered Waters; underwater noise standards for commercial shipping; a review of shipping insurance issues; oil and other hazardous material pollution response agreements; and environmental standards. 4. Implementation: In carrying out this policy as it relates to maritime transportation in the Arctic region, the Secretaries of State, Defense, Transportation, Commerce, and Homeland Security, in coordination with heads of other relevant executive departments and agencies, shall: a. Develop additional measures, in cooperation with other nations, to address issues that are likely to arise from expected increases in shipping into, out of, and through the Arctic region; b. Commensurate with the level of human activity in the region, establish a risk-based capability to address hazards in the Arctic environment. Such efforts shall advance work on pollution prevention and response standards; determine basing and logistics support requirements, including necessary airlift and icebreaking capabilities; and improve plans and cooperative agreements for search and rescue; c. Develop Arctic waterways management regimes in accordance with accepted international standards, including vessel traffic-monitoring and routing; safe navigation standards; accurate and standardized charts; and accurate and timely environmental and navigational information; and d. Evaluate the feasibility of using access through the Arctic for strategic sealift and humanitarian aid and disaster relief. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 103 G. Economic Issues, Including Energy 1. Sustainable development in the Arctic region poses particular challenges. Stakeholder input will inform key decisions as the United States seeks to promote economic and energy security. Climate change and other factors are significantly affecting the lives of Arctic inhabitants, particularly indigenous communities. The United States affirms the importance to Arctic communities of adapting to climate change, given their particular vulnerabilities. 2. Energy development in the Arctic region will play an important role in meeting growing global energy demand as the area is thought to contain a substantial portion of the world’s undiscovered energy resources. The United States seeks to ensure that energy development throughout the Arctic occurs in an environmentally sound manner, taking into account the interests of indigenous and local communities, as well as open and transparent market principles. The United States seeks to balance access to, and development of, energy and other natural resources with the protection of the Arctic environment by ensuring that continental shelf resources are managed in a responsible manner and by continuing to work closely with other Arctic nations. 3. The United States recognizes the value and effectiveness of existing fora, such as the Arctic Council, the International Regulators Forum, and the International Standards Organization. 4. Implementation: In carrying out this policy as it relates to economic issues, including energy, the Secretaries of State, the Interior, Commerce, and Energy, in coordination with heads of other relevant executive departments and agencies, shall: a. Seek to increase efforts, including those in the Arctic Council, to study changing climate conditions, with a view to preserving and enhancing economic opportunity in the Arctic region. Such efforts shall include inventories and assessments of villages, indigenous communities, subsistence opportunities, public facilities, infrastructure, oil and gas development projects, alternative energy development opportunities, forestry, cultural and other sites, living marine resources, and other elements of the Arctic’s socioeconomic composition; b. Work with other Arctic nations to ensure that hydrocarbon and other development in the Arctic region is carried out in accordance with accepted best practices and internationally recognized standards and the 2006 Group of Eight (G-8) Global Energy Security Principles; c. Consult with other Arctic nations to discuss issues related to exploration, production, environmental and socioeconomic impacts, including drilling conduct, facility sharing, the sharing of environmental data, impact assessments, compatible monitoring programs, and reservoir management in areas with potentially shared resources; d. Protect United States interests with respect to hydrocarbon reservoirs that may overlap boundaries to mitigate adverse environmental and economic consequences related to their development; e. Identify opportunities for international cooperation on methane hydrate issues, North Slope hydrology, and other matters; f. Explore whether there is a need for additional fora for informing decisions on hydrocarbon leasing, exploration, development, production, and transportation, as well as shared support activities, including infrastructure projects; and g. Continue to emphasize cooperative mechanisms with nations operating in the region to address shared concerns, recognizing that most known Arctic oil and gas resources are located outside of United States jurisdiction. H. Environmental Protection and Conservation of Natural Resources Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 104 1. The Arctic environment is unique and changing. Increased human activity is expected to bring additional stressors to the Arctic environment, with potentially serious consequences for Arctic communities and ecosystems. 2. Despite a growing body of research, the Arctic environment remains poorly understood. Sea ice and glaciers are in retreat. Permafrost is thawing and coasts are eroding. Pollutants from within and outside the Arctic are contaminating the region. Basic data are lacking in many fields. High levels of uncertainty remain concerning the effects of climate change and increased human activity in the Arctic. Given the need for decisions to be based on sound scientific and socioeconomic information, Arctic environmental research, monitoring, and vulnerability assessments are top priorities. For example, an understanding of the probable consequences of global climate variability and change on Arctic ecosystems is essential to guide the effective long-term management of Arctic natural resources and to address socioeconomic impacts of changing patterns in the use of natural resources. 3. Taking into account the limitations in existing data, United States efforts to protect the Arctic environment and to conserve its natural resources must be risk-based and proceed on the basis of the best available information. 4. The United States supports the application in the Arctic region of the general principles of international fisheries management outlined in the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of December 10, 1982, relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks and similar instruments. The United States endorses the protection of vulnerable marine ecosystems in the Arctic from destructive fishing practices and seeks to ensure an adequate enforcement presence to safeguard Arctic living marine resources. 5. With temperature increases in the Arctic region, contaminants currently locked in the ice and soils will be released into the air, water, and land. This trend, along with increased human activity within and below the Arctic, will result in increased introduction of contaminants into the Arctic, including both persistent pollutants (e.g., persistent organic pollutants and mercury) and airborne pollutants (e.g., soot). 6. Implementation: In carrying out this policy as it relates to environmental protection and conservation of natural resources, the Secretaries of State, the Interior, Commerce, and Homeland Security and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, in coordination with heads of other relevant executive departments and agencies, shall: a. In cooperation with other nations, respond effectively to increased pollutants and other environmental challenges; b. Continue to identify ways to conserve, protect, and sustainably manage Arctic species and ensure adequate enforcement presence to safeguard living marine resources, taking account of the changing ranges or distribution of some species in the Arctic. For species whose range includes areas both within and beyond United States jurisdiction, the United States shall continue to collaborate with other governments to ensure effective conservation and management; c. Seek to develop ways to address changing and expanding commercial fisheries in the Arctic, including through consideration of international agreements or organizations to govern future Arctic fisheries; d. Pursue marine ecosystem-based management in the Arctic; and e. Intensify efforts to develop scientific information on the adverse effects of pollutants on human health and the environment and work with other nations to reduce the introduction of key pollutants into the Arctic. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 105 IV. Resources and Assets A. Implementing a number of the policy elements directed above will require appropriate resources and assets. These elements shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and authorities of agencies, or heads of agencies, vested by law, and subject to the availability of appropriations. The heads of executive departments and agencies with responsibilities relating to the Arctic region shall work to identify future budget, administrative, personnel, or legislative proposal requirements to implement the elements of this directive. ——————————————————————————— [1] These policies and authorities include Freedom of Navigation (PDD/NSC-32), the U.S. Policy on Protecting the Ocean Environment (PDD/NSC-36), Maritime Security Policy (NSPD-41/HSPD-13), and the National Strategy for Maritime Security (NSMS).363 363 Source for text: http://fas.org/irp/offdocs/nspd/nspd-66.htm. The text is also available at http://www.nsf.gov/od/opp/opp_advisory/briefings/may2009/nspd66_hspd25.pdf. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 106 Appendix D. DOD and Coast Guard 2020 Testimony Regarding the Arctic This appendix reprints the texts of prepared statements form DOD and Coast Guard witnesses at hearings held in February and March 2020 on DOD and Coast Guard Arctic capabilities. DOD Testimony (March 3, 2020) At a March 3, 2020, hearing before the Readiness and Management Support subcommittee of the Senate Armed Services Committee on U.S. policy and posture in support of Arctic readiness, James H. Anderson, currently Performing the Duties of Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, testified as follows: The 2019 DoD Arctic Strategy is anchored in the priorities of the National Defense Strategy (NDS), focusing on great power competition as the principal challenge to long-term U.S. security and prosperity. It describes the Department’s desired end-state for the Arctic as “a secure and stable region where U.S. national interests are safeguarded, the U.S. homeland is defended, and nations work cooperatively to address shared challenges.” Strategic competitors are seeking to take advantage of the increasing accessibility of the Arctic to expand their activities in the region. Russia and China are both increasingly active in the region, although in different ways, for different reasons, and with different implications for U.S. national security. Russia’s military investments in the Arctic contribute to its territorial defense, but may result in greater operational risk to forces that access the region. China is seeking a role in Arctic governance, despite the fact that it does not have territory claims in the region. There is also a distinct risk that China may repeat the predatory economic behavior in the Arctic that it has exhibited in other regions to further its strategic ambitions. DoD’s focus, however, is on achieving our defense objectives, rather than seeking to duplicate the capabilities or approaches of our competitors – since doing so plays to their strengths and fails to gain full value from our key advantages. To this end, the DoD Arctic Strategy establishes three defense objectives that guide the Department’s approach to addressing strategic competition in the Arctic. 1) Defend the homeland; 2) Compete when necessary to maintain favorable regional balances of power; and 3) Ensure common domains remain free and open. Competition in the Arctic must be considered in the context of the relationship between the Arctic and key regions identified in the NDS. The Arctic is a potential avenue for expanded great power competition and aggression, since it is located between the two key NDS regions (the Indo-Pacific and Europe) and the U.S. homeland. The Arctic is a region through which the United States may project power to advance favorable balances of power in these key regions. For example, the Greenland-Iceland-UK (GIUK) Gap illustrates the close relationship between the Arctic and the regional balance of power in Europe. Furthermore, competitors may be tempted to use malign or coercive activities in the Arctic in an attempt to advance their objectives in other regions. The Department, both independently and in cooperation with allies and partners, is taking steps to enhance the Joint Force’s ability to operate in the Arctic and project power through and beyond the region. For example, we are pursuing enhanced domain awareness, regular exercises and training, interoperable supporting infrastructure, and extreme cold weather resilience with allies and partners. Of special note, our cooperation with Canada through Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 107 the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD), a long-standing bi-national organization, is vital for homeland defense. More broadly, our network of allies and partners is the cornerstone of the Department’s approach to the Arctic region and represents a strategic advantage for the United States, which China and Russia do not possess. Six of the seven other Arctic nations are either NATO Allies or are NATO Enhanced Opportunities Partners. Our allies and partners are highly capable and proficient in the Arctic region’s operating conditions, and they share the United States’ interest in maintaining and strengthening the international rules-based order – including in the Arctic. Defense cooperation with allies and partners complements broader U.S. Government cooperation in other forums, such as the Arctic Council (which excludes matters related to military and security from its mandate). The Joint Force must have the proficiency to respond to regional contingencies, both independently and in cooperation with allies and partners. This will require agile and capable forces that are able to conduct operations flexibly in the region. We recognize that this task has implications for the Joint Force’s capabilities, given that operations in the harsh Arctic environment place unique demands on the Joint Force. The Department assesses global posture needs based on strategic priorities, the Joint Force’s operational capability needs, and other factors. The Department balances the mission demands of a particular region like the Arctic against other global demands, in a manner consistent with the NDS. In accordance with DoD’s Arctic Strategy, and consistent with Section 1752 of the National Defense Authorization Act for FY 2020, the Department is assessing infrastructure needs in the Arctic to support operational flexibility and power projection. The Department regularly re-evaluates its capability and infrastructure needs as conditions, opportunities, and risks related to U.S. national security evolve. The Department is reviewing potential strategic port sites in the Arctic within the broader context of NDS priorities. Although the Arctic presents unique challenges to the Department, we believe the Department has the right strategic approach, and a strong network of allies and partners, to navigate the region in an era of strategic competition.364 At the same hearing, Air Force General Terrence O’SHAUGHNESSY, Commander, U.S. Northern Command and North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD), testified as follows: Chairman Sullivan, Ranking Member Kaine, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee: I am honored to appear before you today and to serve as the Commander of U.S. Northern Commarid (USNORTHCOM) and North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD). I would like to begin by thanking the Subcommittee for your steadfast support of our commands’ shared homeland defense mission and for the opportunity to discuss the significant challenges associated with operating in the Arctic. USNORTHCOM and NORAD are driven by a single unyielding priority: defending the homeland. In the years following the Cold War, our nation enjoyed the benefits of military dominance as well as geographic barriers that kept our homeland beyond the reach of most conventional threats. Our power projection capabilities and technological overmatch allowed us to fight forward, focusing our energy on the conduct of operations overseas. However, our key adversaries watched and learned, invested in capabilities to offset our strengths while exploiting our weaknesses, and have demonstrated patterns of behavior that indicate they currently have the capability, capacity, and intent to hold our homeland at significant risk below the threshold of nuclear war. Eroding military advantage is 364 Statement for the Record before the Senate Armed Services Committee, Subcommittee on Readiness and Management Support, on U.S. Policy and Posture in Support of Arctic Readiness, March 3, 2020, 4 pp. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 108 undermining our ability to detect threats, defeat attacks, and therefore deter aggression against the homeland. This is emboldening competitors and adversaries to challenge us at home, holding at risk our people, our critical infrastructure, and our ability to project power forward. The threats facing the United States and Canada are real and significant. The Arctic is no longer a fortress wall, and our oceans are no longer protective moats; they are now avenues of approach for advanced conventional weapons and the platforms that carry them. Our adversaries’ capability to directly attack the homeland has leapt forward, and they are engaged in overt, concerted efforts to weaken our national technological, economic, and strategic advantage. To address this reality, our two distinct but complementary commands are taking significant, vigorous steps to ensure our homeland defense enterprise is ready to deter, detect, and defeat threats now and well into the future. Throughout 2019, Russia continued to expand its military infrastructure in the Arctic. Throughout the year, Russia lengthened existing runways and built new ones at multiple airfields in the high north. In September, Russia deployed a Bastion coastal defense cruise missile unit to the Chukotka Peninsula, opposite the Bering Sea from Alaska, for a first-ever training launch from that region. The missile successfully struck a sea-based target more than 200 kilometers away, according to the Russian Defense Ministry. When deployed to the Russian northeast, this system has the capability not only to control access to the Arctic through the Bering Strait, but also to strike land targets in parts of Alaska with little to no warning. Like the Russians, China also continues to invest heavily in the Arctic, determined to exploit the region’s economic and strategic potential as a self-proclaimed “near Arctic” nation. In the last few years, Chinese survey vessels have conducted several deployments to the Bering and Chukchi Seas, providing familiarity and experience that could eventually translate to Chinese naval operations in the region. The Arctic is the new frontline of our homeland defense as it provides our adversaries with a direct avenue of approach to the homeland and is representative of the changing strategic environment in our area of responsibility. More consistently navigable waters, mounting demand for natural resources, and Russia’s military buildup in the region make the Arctic an immediate challenge for USNORTHCOM, NORAD, our northern allies, and our neighboring geographic combatant commands, U.S. European Command and U.S. Indo-Pacific Command. By fielding advanced, long-range cruise missiles -to include land attack missiles capable of striking the United States and Canada from Russian territory- and expanding its military presence in the region, Russia has left us with no choice but to improve our homeland defense capability and capacity. In the meantime, China has taken a number of incremental steps toward expanding its own Arctic presence. In tum, USNORTHCOM and NORAD are strengthening the four pillars of our defenses in the high north: domain awareness, communications, infrastructure improvement, and sustainable presence in our own Arctic territory. I want reiterate my thanks to the subcommittee for your constant support as USNORTHCOM and NORAD have met our homeland defense challenges in the Arctic head-on. There are no easy solutions to the challenges presented by the extreme climate, terrain, and distances inherent in Arctic operations. However, due in no small measure to your continued attention and advocacy for our commands’ requirements, we have seen significant attention, expertise, and resources brought to bear on the homeland defense mission in the Arctic from throughout the Department of Defense. Over the last year, our commands have worked alongside the military Services and the Office of the Secretary of Defense to ensure that our warfighting requirements are met, with particular emphasis on improving joint domain awareness and communications. In Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 109 order to reclaim our strategic advantage in the high north, it is critical that we improve our ability to detect and track surface vessels and aircraft in our Arctic approaches and establish more reliable secure communications for our joint force warfighters operating in the higher latitudes. This focus is now apparent in the 2019 DOD Arctic Strategy, which reflects my command priorities and makes it clear that DOD must defend the homeland against threats emanating from our northern approaches. As stated in the National Defense Strategy, a core Department of Defense objective is to ensure that common domains remain open and free. In pursuit of that objective, USNORTHCOM and NORAD are very proud of our work with allies and partners to improve our shared presence and interoperability in the region and update our information sharing agreements with our Arctic allies and partners. Of note in the last year, USNORTHCOM and NORAD leaders also conducted engagements with the Danish Joint Arctic Command in Greenland and joined the United Kingdom Ministry of Defense in direct staff talks. These collaborative efforts help to reaffirm our commitment to our international partners while enhancing USNORTHCOM and NORAD’s defense capability. We are leveraging the on-the-ground experience and expertise of our warfighters in USNORTHCOM’s Alaska Command along with leaders, planners, and combatants from USINDOPACOM and USEUCOM as we prepare for ARCTIC EDGE 20- the nation’s premier Arctic exercise. ARCTIC EDGE 20 will take full advantage of the unsurpassed capabilities of the Joint Pacific Alaska Range Complex (JP ARC) and allow us to test our capability to fight, communicate, and win in the harsh terrain and climate of the high north. I am personally placing significant emphasis on this important exercise, as the lessons we learn from ARCTIC EDGE 20 will play an important role in validating the requirements that will allow us to deter, detect, and defeat potential adversaries along the front line of our nation’s defenses. Our adversaries have the ability to threaten our homeland in multiple domains and from numerous avenues of approach- and our commands are especially focused on improving our ability to defend our northern approaches. We cannot deter what we cannot defeat, and we cannot defeat that which we cannot detect. In order to effectively defend the homeland, USNORTHCOM and NORAD have developed a Homeland Defense Design (HDD) consisting of three main elements: a layered sensing grid for domain awareness, an adaptive architecture for joint all-domain command and control (JADC2), and new defeat mechanisms for advanced threats. These three elements are vital to deterring and defeating advanced threats to the homeland, and USNORTHCOM and NORAD are moving with a sense of profound urgency to bring these capabilities into the fight. Our need to improve our domain awareness begins with developing and integrating advanced sensors capable of detecting and tracking threats no matter where they originate. These sensors must be able to detect, track, and discriminate advanced cruise missiles, ballistic missiles, hypersonics, and small unmanned aerial systems at the full ranges from which they are employed. The sensors must also detect and track the platforms - aircraft, ships, and submarines - that carry those weapons. A robust and resilient space layer is increasingly critical to provide the earliest possible detection and fidelity of data required. Stovepiped transmission of data from non-compatible sensors presents a significant impediment to our ability to defend against advanced threats. To overcome this issue, we need a robust architecture for JADC2 to effectively gather data from a myriad of sensors across all domains and share it seamlessly. The architecture must facilitate rapid data fusion, processing, and analytics to feed decision makers at all levels with accurate, decision-quality information at the speed of relevance. Data from any sensor should feed any defeat mechanism, and rapid data fusion and analysis should provide faster, more precise solutions to all shooters. This architecture will facilitate high-tempo decision cycles for agile, resilient, redundant, and joint command and control. By leveraging a cloud Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 110 architecture, big data analytics, edge computing, artificial intelligence, and machine learning, this network should sense a threat from one node and engage it precisely and expeditiously from another across vast distances and across all domains. Finally, we require new defeat mechanisms for advance threat systems- to include the advanced cruise missiles capable of striking the homeland from launch boxes in the Arctic. As adversary threat systems, employment doctrine, and operational competencies become more numerous, multi-modal, and complex, our current defeat mechanisms will become increasingly challenged. Additionally, the cost ratio of adversary threat missiles to our missile defeat mechanisms is not in our favor. We must flip the cost ratio back in our favor with deep magazine, rapid fire, and low-cost defeat mechanisms. While these capabilities will play a critical role throughout the USNORTHCOM and NORAD areas of responsibility, they will be especially vital in our northern approaches. As diminishing Arctic ice creates opportunities for increased international commercial and military presence, our adversaries will continue their efforts to exploit the vast distances and inherent complexity of operating in the high north. Our commands are working closely with tech and defense industry partners to rapidly overcome our most pressing challenges in the region. Specifically, our commands are collaborating with large and small companies from the commercial tech sector in order to leverage emerging technologies and digital-age approaches with potential homeland defense applications. Under this iterative approach, our commands and our commercial partners have developed a common understanding of our shared challenges and opportunities over time. In tum, we are allowing our nation’s innovators to apply their expertise and propose advanced, innovative solutions using new but proven technology that can be rapidly incorporated into the homeland defense ecosystem in order to improve our domain awareness, JADC2 architecture, and defeat mechanisms. We are also adapting and evolving how we work with traditional U.S. defense industry. Rather than prescribing specific materiel solutions to the challenges facing our commands, USNORTHCOM and NORAD are engaged in ongoing two-way dialogue with defense industry innovators to share our perspective on the changing strategic environment, emerging threats to the homeland, and operational requirements. We are working with our industry partners to ensure they understand our specific challenges and needs. In tum, our partners are identifying ways to bring new and existing systems into the homeland defense architecture and provide tailored solutions to our unique challenges. This approach has already shown game-changing potential. Over the last several months, USNORTHCOM and NORAD have collaborated with the defense industry, commercial tech partners, and the military Services on successful field demonstrations of emerging sensor, information fusion, and satellite communications technologies. For example, the same technology that is capable of delivering high-speed internet and voice communications to remote indigenous communities for the first time has the clear potential to bridge some of the gaps in military communications in the same region. I am excited and encouraged by the results of these demonstrations, and we will continue to lead these experiments and to solicit innovative proposals from established defense industry and emerging tech partners. There are no routine operations in the Arctic, but USNORTHCOM and NORAD are firmly committed to defending our homeland. Thanks in no small measure to your support, the innovative spirit of our industry and interagency partners, and the deep commitment of the men and women I am proud to lead, I have no doubt that we will continue to deter and Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 111 defeat the threats facing our homeland- to include those originating in the Arctic. We Have the Watch.365 Coast Guard Testimony (February 5, 2020) At a February 5, 2020, hearing before the Transportation and Maritime Security subcommittee of the House Homeland Security Committee on Arctic security issues, Admiral Charles Ray, Vice Commandant of the Coast Guard, testified as follows: Introduction Good morning Mr. Chairman and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. It is my pleasure to be here to discuss the U.S. Coast Guard’s strategy and operations to safeguard national security interests and advance safe, secure, and environmentally responsible maritime activity in the Arctic Region. The Coast Guard has been operating in the Arctic Ocean since 1867, when the United States purchased Alaska from Russia. Since that time, the state of affairs in the Arctic has evolved significantly. The ice is receding; storms are increasing in frequency and magnitude; the coast is eroding; and permafrost is thawing. Alaskan residents are striving to evolve their resiliency and to sustain their culture and way of life while residents and non-residents alike are pursuing emerging opportunities. For the Coast Guard, the demand signal for our services is expanding along with the operational environment, exacerbating the tyranny of distance of the region. The types of commercial activity are morphing, from oil and gas exploration a few years ago to the recent surge in cruise ship activity and expanding environmental tourism. These rapid changes in types and location of activity, along with the changes in the physical environment, magnify the challenges in executing the Service’s mission to advance safety, security, sovereign rights, and stewardship across the Arctic. Simultaneously, the geopolitical environment is rapidly changing as state and non-state actors seek to advance their own interests in the Arctic. Allies, partners, and competitors alike increasingly compete for diplomatic, economic, and strategic advantage. The National Defense Strategy describes a world no longer at either peace or war but rather one of enduring great power competition. Shaping and influencing this competition continuum requires a mixture of diplomatic, informational, military, economic, financial, intelligence, and law enforcement efforts to achieve and sustain national strategic objectives. As the only U.S. Armed Force with both military and law enforcement authorities, combined with membership in the intelligence community, the Coast Guard seamlessly bridges the layers across this continuum. Specifically, the Coast Guard’s constabulary function and broad authorities serve as a critical bridge between the hard-power lethality of the Defense Department and soft-power diplomacy of the State Department. This strategic versatility is well suited for operating in ambiguous environments. This makes the Coast Guard a unique agency to cultivate strong international relationships and build a coalition of Arctic partners based on mutual interests and values that strengthen regional stability and enhance prosperity across the region. Our recently published 2019 Arctic Strategic Outlook reaffirms the Service’s commitment to advancing and protecting national security interests in the region through American leadership, partnership, unity of effort, and continuous innovation. The Outlook establishes three lines of effort to achieve long-term success. First, we will enhance capability to operate effectively in a dynamic Arctic domain; second, we will strengthen the rules-based 365 Statement of General Terrence J. O'Shaughnessy, United States Air Force, Commander, United States Northern Command and North American Aerospace Defense Command, before the Senate Armed Services Committee Subcommittee on Readiness and Management Support, March 3, 2020, 7 pp. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 112 order; and third, we will innovate and adapt to promote resilience and foster prosperity. Meeting the Nation’s needs and interests to secure the Arctic requires significant investment and a whole-of-government approach across multiple Departments, agencies, and Services. The Coast Guard’s value in this whole-of-government approach is our experience, leadership, model behavior, and ability to compete below the level of armed conflict. Therefore, strengthening the Coast Guard empowers the Nation to secure the Arctic against threats and shape the region as a safe, cooperative, and prosperous domain. National Security Interests in the Arctic Region The United States is an Arctic nation with extensive sovereign rights and responsibilities, and our national security interests in the Arctic are significant, in part due to the reemergence of great power competition in the region. As access to the region evolves, many Arctic and non-Arctic nations aspire to assert or expand their role in governing the region; the dynamic operational environment continues to present risks and opportunities for a broad spectrum of stakeholders. To safeguard our national interests, the United States must plan for a robust, year-round maritime presence commensurate with the expanding interest in the Arctic’s strategic value, in its natural resources, and in its potential as a transportation corridor between Asia, Europe, and North America. If we are not vigilant and proactive, other Arctic and non-Arctic nations will outpace us in assuring their strategic interests in the region in ways that may adversely affect the United States’ interests. Actions and intentions of Arctic and non-Arctic nations shape the security environment and geopolitical stability of the region. In particular, our two near-peer competitors, Russia and China, are demonstrably intent on exploiting the maritime domain to advance their interests. Twenty percent of Russia’s landmass is north of the Arctic Circle, and both onshore and offshore resource (minerals, oil, and gas) development is crucial to the Russian economy. Russia is also advancing the growth of the Northern Sea Route (NSR) for trans-Arctic shipping and other commercial opportunities. The NSR continues to set new shipping records, last year reaching 29 million tons of goods transported along the route. Natural resource extraction is the main contributor to these increases, predominantly oil and gas shipments from their Yamal facilities. If their energy projections come to fruition, then transport volumes on the NSR could reach 100 million tons per year by 2030. From a military perspective, Russia’s long Arctic coastline, once stripped of sea ice in the future, will be both vulnerable, and able to support naval fleets readily deployable between the Atlantic and Pacific. The Russian government is currently rebuilding and expanding military bases that had previously fallen into disuse. These renewed capabilities include air bases, ports, weapons systems, troop deployments, domain awareness tools, and search-and-rescue response. Additionally, Russia has the world’s largest number of icebreakers. With over 50 icebreakers that include four operational, nuclear-powered heavy icebreakers, and plans to build an additional seven nuclear powered icebreakers, Russia maintains the capabilities, capacities, experienced crews, and infrastructure necessary to operate and surge into the Arctic year-round. China, a non-Arctic nation, has recently taken an active role in Arctic development, pursuing economic investments with every Arctic nation in key strategic areas, such as oil and gas development, ports, railways, and infrastructure. It has purchased numerous resource deposits throughout the region, including uranium, energy, and rare-earth elements. With the release of their Arctic Policy paper in January 2018, China declared itself a nation intrinsically tied to the Arctic, and signaled their intention to play a security and governance role in the region. China has directed Chinese companies and government agencies to become more involved in Arctic affairs, and is rapidly developing its ability to operate in the region. This year, China launched its first home-built icebreaker and has begun designing an even more powerful and potentially nuclear-powered Polar icebreaker expected to have twice the icebreaking capability of its newest vessel. With three Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 113 icebreakers China will have greater access than the United States currently has to the Arctic, its ports, and its resources. The concern with Chinese activities in the Arctic is the potential to disrupt the cooperation and stability in the region. Around the globe, China uses coercion, influence operations, debt-trap diplomacy, and implied military threats to persuade other states to heed China’s strategic agenda. China views the Arctic as a component of its One Belt, One Road initiative, recently dubbed the Polar Silk Road. China’s ambitions and outreach are fraught with risk, often times diminishing the sovereignty of states and fracturing the rules-based governance currently employed in the region. National security interests extend to the local level as well. For example, economic, environmental, and human security and stewardship are also linked to the changes and expanding activity in the Arctic. Significant increases in natural resource extraction in the U.S. Arctic have not yet materialized, but industries continue to explore opportunities so that they are positioned to leverage economic prospects as they emerge. Current industry growth in the Arctic includes a significant increase in cruise tourism and transpolar flights, which could potentially increase search and rescue missions and risk to the pristine environment. Additionally, we have observed steady but measured growth of shipping through the Bering Strait over the past ten years, across all sectors of industry. As the Arctic continues to experience longer and larger periods of reduced or ice-free conditions, commercial interest and exploitation will grow. A recent U.S. Committee on the Marine Transportation System report projects that by 2030, vessel traffic through the Bering Strait could increase to more than 370 transits, which is roughly three times the 2008 traffic levels. This potential rise will increase the demand for the Coast Guard to monitor, protect, and regulate increased maritime activity, such as de-conflicting shipping corridors in U.S. waters with subsistence hunting and fishing communities. Food security is another significant issue for Arctic residents and our Nation as a whole. The Bering Sea provides more than half of the wild-caught fish and shellfish in the United States, and the wildlife for subsistence harvesting. Alaska is ranked seventh in the world in global fish exporters, and their seafood industry accounts for almost $6 billion a year in total economic activity. Additionally, approximately 70% of the U.S. Arctic population relies on subsistence hunting and fishing for survival, the vast majority of which comes from the sea. Thus, changes occurring in the Arctic Ocean are increasing the risk to food security for the globe, from shipping that disrupts migration patterns, to increased risk of pollution incidents, to growth in illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing as fish stocks migrate. As human activity continues to increase in the Arctic region, challenges associated with legal and illicit activity plus state and non-state actors are likely to increase. In the face of this competition continuum, the Coast Guard’s value proposition is even more critical in the Arctic and around the globe. The Service upholds freedom of the seas and the rules-based order by setting and enforcing standards of behavior in the maritime domain. Balancing National Security Interests Across the Globe The Coast Guard possesses a broad suite of authorities and capabilities unique from the other armed services and traditional instruments of national power. As previously noted, the Coast Guard’s authorities expand beyond traditional military and intelligence roles, to include law enforcement and regulatory roles. This combination, along with a multitude of steady-state international bilateral agreements, offers a distinct compliment to conventional defense forces in the ongoing struggle to compete below the level of armed conflict. Coast Guard international engagements complement more traditional U.S. military posturing. Regular and persistent Coast Guard presence and peaceful engagements support regional stability while positioning the United States as the global maritime security partner of choice. The Coast Guard operates around the world in accordance with over 60 international bilateral agreements, to include 11 with Oceania nations. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 114 Furthermore, the Service is also party to and, in many cases, serves in a leading capacity within a variety of multilateral forums including the North Pacific Coast Guard Forum, Arctic Coast Guard Forum, South East Asia Maritime Law Enforcement Cooperation, and the Africa Maritime Law Enforcement Partnership. This combination of access, authorities, and international acceptance, offers an indispensable opportunity of regional support and stability in this new era of competing influence. As the world’s preeminent coast guard, the U.S. Coast Guard is logically the most suited to build partner capacity in maritime law enforcement, search and rescue, marine safety, fisheries management and conservation—all of which are traditional Coast Guard missions. These missions, incidentally, are in growing demand across the globe. Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing, in particular, is a priority issue impacting global stability, in the Atlantic, across the Pacific, and even in Antarctica, where many economies heavily depend on local fish stocks as a primary source of protein and personal income. The Service, through its internationally recognized maritime law enforcement expertise and a multitude of bilateral and related ship rider agreements, offers viable options to augment partner nation law enforcement capacity to patrol their respective exclusive economic zones. These efforts are essential to preserving, protecting, and defending critical regional and migratory fish stock sustainability and economic vitality while simultaneously countering the malign influence and predatory practices of globally-spread powers such as China. The Coast Guard in Alaska and the Arctic Region As stated, our 2019 Arctic Strategic Outlook reaffirms our commitment to American leadership in the region and articulates the ends, ways, and means to promote and safeguard national security in the Arctic. This includes waging a campaign for safety, all sovereign rights, and stewardship through cooperation; addressing competition below the level of conflict; and preparing for conflict should it arise. The following highlights some of the initiatives that have particular impacts on our national and international security, but these activities must be part of an integrated, whole-of-government approach to security in the Arctic. Strategic Leadership As many nations and other stakeholders across the world aspire to expand their roles and activities in the Arctic, the Coast Guard is working collaboratively through international bodies to address the emerging challenges and opportunities in the region. One example is our support to the Arctic Council, which is a high-level international forum focused primarily on environmental protection and sustainable development issues in the Arctic region. The Council is composed of the eight Arctic nations, six Arctic indigenous groups, observer nations (including China), and nongovernmental organizations that have observer status. The Coast Guard plays a significant role in supporting our Nation’s existing engagement in Arctic Council activities through representation on two standing working groups – Emergency Prevention, Preparedness & Response (EPPR), and Protection of the Arctic Marine Environment (PAME). Under the EPPR working group, the Coast Guard leads the U.S. Government delegation and serves as Chair of the Marine Environmental Response Experts Group. Within PAME, the Coast Guard participates in the Shipping Experts Group where we support projects such as mitigation of risks associated with the use and carriage of heavy fuel oil by vessels in the Arctic. The Coast Guard also served on the Council’s Task Force on Arctic Marine Cooperation and has been active in other task forces that established the 2011 Arctic Search Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 115 and Rescue Agreement, the 2013 Oil Spill Prevention and Response Agreement, and the 2015 Framework for Oil Pollution Prevention.366 The Coast Guard has also supported Arctic safety through other international bodies such as the International Maritime Organization (IMO). The Coast Guard was instrumental in the IMO’s development and adoption of the International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters (Polar Code) to cover the design, construction, equipment, operational, training, and environmental protection matters relevant to ships operating in the Polar regions. In 2017, the Coast Guard completed a rulemaking process to issue Polar Ship Certificates to U.S. vessels. We also developed and promulgated guidance to industry and our Captains-of-the-Port on how to ensure compliance with the Polar Code. Additionally, in November 2017, the Coast Guard collaborated with the Russian Federation to jointly develop and submit a proposal to the IMO to establish a system of two-way routes in the Bering Strait and Bering Sea. The Coast Guard also submitted an associated proposal to establish “Areas to be Avoided” in three environmentally sensitive areas. The objective was to advance the maritime transportation system in the region; promote the safe, responsible flow of commerce; and de-conflict the commercial uses of the waterways with subsistence activities. The IMO adopted these measures at the 99th session of its Maritime Safety Committee, and the provisions entered into force in December 2018. These are but two examples of the Coast Guard being proactive in addressing emerging international and domestic maritime concerns in the Arctic. Last, the Arctic Coast Guard Forum (ACGF) is a bridge between diplomacy and operations. Formally established in October 2015, the ACGF operationalizes all of the elements of our Arctic strategy as well as the objectives of the Arctic Council. It is a unique, action-oriented maritime governance forum where the Coast Guard and our peer agencies from the other seven Arctic nations strengthen relationships, identify lessons learned, share best practices, carry out exercises, conduct combined operations, and coordinate emergency response missions. In April 2019, the ACGF conducted its second live exercise, POLARIS, which incorporated six ships and five aircraft from the ACGF member nations to respond to a simulated cruise ship in distress near Finland. The exercise was a successful demonstration of combined operations with the eight ACGF nations and highlights the criticality of coordination in maritime environmental response and the responsibility to ensure search and rescue resources are prepared to respond. Coast Guard Operations in the American Arctic Operation ARCTIC SHIELD is the Coast Guard’s year-round planning and operational endeavor that provides a flexible, mobile, and scalable presence in the Arctic domain. In 2019, ARCTIC SHIELD (AS19) operations advanced national and Coast Guard strategic goals by aligning operations to mitigate real-world threats and leverage opportunities of strategic interest. To promote regional resilience and strengthen the maritime transportation system, the Coast Guard spearheaded a Marine Safety Task Force (MSTF) to conduct missions in the remote regions of their Area of Responsibility (AOR). Employing active and reserve surge personnel, the MSTF deployed to and engaged with 102 local communities to perform marine safety and marine environmental protection missions in villages not on the road system in the Arctic and Western Alaska. In addition to the summer surge support, a major contributor to the MSTF success has been its partnerships: the Civil Air Patrol transportation saved valuable resources and allowed personnel to transit more seamlessly between remote villages. 366 Testimony of Admiral Charles W. Ray, Coast Guard Vice Commandant, on “Arctic Security Issues” before the House Homeland Security Subcommittee on Transportation & Maritime Security, February 5, 2020, 10 pp. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 116 The MSTF teams inspected over 60% of the region’s 380 regulated bulk oil facilities – a massive improvement over the prior annual average of 12%. Frequent inspections and proactive communications between the Coast Guard and facility operators will reduce the environmental risk to remote communities, help remote villages build capacity to respond, and set baselines for resilience and awareness as their environment rapidly changes. From July to October, MH-60 helicopters and crews deployed to Forward Operating Location Kotzebue and to Utqiagvik to conduct Coast Guard missions. This year, those helicopters completed 25 SAR cases, saved 13 lives, and assisted 28 others in an environment harsher than anywhere else the Coast Guard operates. Additionally these assets improved the Coast Guard’s maritime domain awareness in the Arctic and provided critical support to federal and state personnel studying marine mammals. The Coast Guard partnered with DoD to leverage their strategic lift capabilities to deploy the assets to Kotzebue and the North Slope. Additionally, when the helicopters made the unplanned shift to Utqiagvik in September, the Coast Guard leveraged a longstanding positive partnership with the North Slope Borough to gain critical hanger space and logistical support on short notice. The Coast Guard would not have been able to complete its scheduled deployment to the Arctic and provide SAR coverage to North Slope mariners without the efforts and support from both. The Coast Guard departed Utqiagvik on October 31, 2019, but subsistence whale hunting extended beyond the traditional season. This highlights the changing operational environment not only for the Coast Guard but also for Arctic residents. The lengthened “shoulder” seasons of open water are beyond the period in which the Coast Guard has the resources to be present. Without the Coast Guard’s highly mobile expeditionary forces, risk to mariners and coastal residents will escalate as maritime activity and traffic expands throughout the vast Arctic. AS19 exercised the Coast Guard’s expeditionary capability by deploying a team from our Deployable Specialized Forces in California to conduct shore based law enforcement operations for the Kotzebue salmon state fishery that consists of nearly 100 small open skiffs. The enforcement operation reinforced several years of extensive marine prevention outreach, education, and training with these fishers. Planning and executing this mission highlighted the logistical and administrative challenges involved in supporting mission execution in the Arctic. This deployed law enforcement team provided 3 weeks of on-water presence and contacted 59 commercial fishing vessels and conducted 27 boardings with 5 voyage terminations. The operation bolstered community support from the mayor and local fishermen and rallied the community to improve their own safety and survivability at sea. In the absence of a consistent law enforcement presence in the region, the Coast Guard must develop and exercise expeditionary capability to project surface forces into the Arctic as the weather patterns are less predictable and maritime activity continues to evolve. This team’s employment points to the urgent need to modernize assets, infrastructure, and platforms to effectively operate and provide presence in the Arctic. In 2020, operations will be supported with cutter, aircraft, and shoreside presence across Western and Northern Alaska. Specific activities include establishing a regional SAR response capability, conducting boardings to promote fishing vessel safety, facility and vessel inspections, gold dredge fleet inspections, maritime safety compliance enforcement, and ice rescue training. Planned activities also include testing and improving oil spill preparedness and response capabilities, conducting a commercial aircraft crash-related mass rescue exercise, and completing a joint maritime pollution contingency exercise with international partners. Year-round outreach efforts will continue to deliver education and awareness services to Arctic communities and outlying native villages. As presence equals influence, the Coast Guard must continue to evaluate options to advance our 2019 Arctic Strategic Outlook as well as national interests in the region. The resurgence of nation-state competition over the past 5-10 years has coincided with the Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 117 dramatic changes in the physical environment of the Arctic. This reality has elevated the Arctic’s prominence as a strategically competitive space. The Coast Guard, and the Nation, have limited means to respond to, intercept, or collect information on vessels operating in the Arctic region. Icebreaking Capacity and Acquisition Status The ability for the United States to lead in the Arctic, both strategically and operationally, hinges on having the capabilities and capacity (presence) to protect our national sovereignty and safeguard our homeland security interests. The foundation of the Coast Guard’s operational presence and influence is U.S. icebreakers, whose purpose is to provide assured, year-round access to the polar regions for executing national security missions within existing Coast Guard authorities. Our heavy icebreakers must be fully interoperable with DoD, international allies, and partners to optimally carry out national maritime homeland defense and homeland security missions. Thus, they will include sufficient space, weight, and power to conduct the full complement of multi-mission activities that support our Nation’s current and future national security interests in the Arctic. The 2010 High Latitude Mission Analysis Report (HL MAR) identified the need for six new polar icebreakers (at least three of which must be heavy) under the assumption that, in the future, the Coast Guard would be required to perform nine of its eleven statutory missions year-round in the Arctic, and meet all icebreaking needs in support of the United States Antarctic Program. In 2017, the Coast Guard’s Center for Arctic Study and Policy completed an addendum to the HL MAR. The objectives were to provide a broad overview of changes in the polar regions over the last seven years and to provide specific information for use in determining potential impacts on mission areas in the polar regions. This addendum provides confidence in the original findings and encourages the sustained reliance on its initial recommendations on the Nation’s need for six icebreakers, three of which must be heavy icebreakers. The current Coast Guard icebreaker capacity is one heavy polar icebreaker, CGC POLAR STAR – commissioned in 1976, and one medium icebreaker, CGC HEALY – commissioned in 2000. The primary differences between heavy and medium icebreakers are endurance and power. The Coast Guard considers a heavy icebreaker to be one that can break at least six feet of ice at a continuous speed of three knots and operate year-round in the Arctic, with the necessary systems and endurance to protect its crew in the event it has to “winter-over” in substantial ice conditions. Conversely, medium icebreakers are designed to operate seasonally in the Arctic. Due to the strong support of the Administration and Congress, the FY 2019 appropriation included full funding for the acquisition of our first Polar Security Cutter (PSC), and some long lead time materials for the second. This investment sends a strong message that the Nation is serious about our interests in the Arctic. In April of last year, the joint Coast Guard and Navy Integrated Program Office (IPO) awarded VT Halter Marine Inc., of Pascagoula, Mississippi, a fixed price incentive (firm) contract for the detail design and construction of the lead PSC. We are as close as we have been in over 40 years to recapitalizing our icebreaking fleet, and continued investment will ensure we meet our Nation’s growing needs in the rapidly evolving and dynamic polar regions. The Coast Guard also understands that we must maintain our existing heavy and medium icebreaking capability while proceeding with recapitalization. Construction on the first PSC is planned to begin in 2021 with delivery planned for 2024; however, the contract includes financial incentives for earlier delivery. Maintenance of POLAR STAR will be critical to sustaining this capability until the new PSCs are delivered. Robust planning efforts for a service life extension project on POLAR STAR are already underway and Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 118 initial work for this project will begin in 2020, with phased industrial work occurring annually from 2021 through 2023. The end goal of this process will be to extend the vessel’s service life until delivery of at least the second new PSC. Shore Infrastructure In addition to having the necessary platforms to maintain our presence in the Arctic, the Coast Guard maintains a robust shore infrastructure laydown in Alaska. Shore facilities support all Coast Guard operations and personnel, as well as provide required infrastructure to support the needs of the Service’s operational communities. Investments in shore infrastructure are critical to modernizing the Coast Guard and equipping our workforce with the facilities required to meet mission. With approximately 10% of the Coast Guard’s real property inventory located in Alaska, the need for proper capital investments is all the more critical given the vast distances between shore facilities in that region. We are currently building waterfront facilities and shore infrastructure to support the delivery of six new Fast Response Cutters (FRC) and two Offshore Patrol Cutters (OPC) to Alaska, as well as the critical housing and family support facilities to accommodate the additional personnel and their families to operate and maintain these new assets. Additionally, over the last few years, we have built a new hangar to support forward deployed helicopters in Cold Bay, 20 new housing units in Kodiak, as well as new facilities in Kodiak to enable our transition from C-130H to C-130J aircraft. Conclusion These efforts reaffirm our commitment to the region and the Nation’s need for capabilities, capacities, and infrastructure to protect our national security interests in the region. Arctic operations must be balanced with competing demands for Coast Guard capabilities both at home and abroad. However, the Coast Guard must remain flexible and scalable to adapt to the rapidly evolving geopolitical and operational Arctic environments. Regardless, the Coast Guard will continue to lead across the National and international landscape to build a coalition of like-minded partners in order to shape the Arctic domain as an area of low tension, high attention, and great cooperation while preserving our national interests and rights. This leadership and collaboration across the national and international spectrum will enable us to reinforce positive opportunities and mitigate negative consequences in the Arctic region. Failing to increase and focus our Nation’s leadership in the Arctic will result in other powerful nations taking the lead in a region with critical geostrategic value. We understand the significant investment required to secure the Arctic, and we appreciate and embrace the trust the Nation has placed in the Service. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today and for all you do for the men and women of the Coast Guard. I look forward to answering your questions. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 119 Appendix E. Extended Continental Shelf Submissions, Territorial Disputes, and Sovereignty Issues367 This appendix presents background information on extended continental shelf submissions, territorial disputes, and sovereignty issues. Extended Continental Shelf Submissions Motivated in part by a desire to exercise sovereign control over the Arctic region’s increasingly accessible oil and gas reserves (see “Oil, Gas, and Mineral Exploration”), the four Arctic coastal states other than the United States—Canada, Russia, Norway, and Denmark (of which Greenland is a territory)—have filed or are in the process of preparing submissions to the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf regarding the outer limits of their extended continental shelves. A fifth country, Iceland, though not an Arctic coastal state, has filed a submission regarding waters in the vicinity of the Arctic Circle. The submissions are as follows:  Norway filed a submission regarding the Northeast Atlantic and the Arctic on November 27, 2006. The Commission adopted its recommendations regarding this submission on March 27, 2009.  Denmark filed a submission regarding an area north of the Faroe Islands on April 29, 2009. The Commission adopted its recommendations regarding this submission on March 11, 2014.  Iceland filed a submission regarding the Ægir Basin area to the east and northeast of Iceland, and the western and southern parts of Reykjanes Ridge to southwest of Iceland, on April 29, 2009. The Commission adopted its recommendations regarding this submission on March 10, 2016.  Denmark filed a submission regarding the southern continental shelf of Greenland on June 14, 2012, a submission regarding the northeastern continental shelf of Greenland on November 26, 2013, and submission regarding the northern continental shelf of Greenland on December 15, 2014.  Russia filed a partial revised submission regarding the Arctic Ocean on August 3, 2015. (Russia’s December 20, 2001, submission regarding the Arctic and Pacific Oceans was rejected by the Commission as insufficiently documented.)  Canada filed a submission regarding the Arctic Ocean on May 23, 2019.368 367 This section was prepared by Carl Ek, who was a Specialist in International Relations, Foreign Affairs, Defense, and Trade Division, until his retirement on April 30, 2014. It was revised to include the information about the submissions made to the Commission by Ronald O’Rourke, Specialist in Naval Affairs, Foreign Affairs, Defense, and Trade Division. For questions relating to this section, congressional clients may contact Derek E. Mix, Analyst in European Affairs, Foreign Affairs, Defense, and Trade Division. 368 Source for dates of submissions and Commission actions: United Nations, Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, “Submissions, through the Secretary-General of the United Nations, to the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, pursuant to article 76, paragraph 8, of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982,” updated December 12, 2019, accessed March 23, 2020, at https://www.un.org/Depts/los/clcs_new/commission_submissions.htm. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 120 In support of its submissions to the Commission, Russia has been charting the Arctic Ocean’s enormous underwater Lomonosov Ridge, which runs across the middle of the Arctic Ocean, somewhat like the seam of a baseball, from a location north of Russia’s New Siberian Islands to a location north of Greenland’s northern coast, passing about midpoint almost directly through the North Pole. Russia is attempting to show that this ridge is connected to Russia’s known extended continental shelf. A determination that the ridge is part of Russia’s extended continental shelf could create an extension of Russia’s extended continental shelf running across the central part of the Arctic Ocean to an area north of Greenland. Canada views a portion of the ridge as part of its own continental shelf,369 and Denmark’s December 15, 2014, submission regarding the northern continental shelf of Greenland may include part of the ridge. In August 2007, a Russian submersible on a research expedition deposited an encased Russian Federation flag on the seabed of the presumed site of the North Pole. The action captured worldwide attention, but analysts noted that it did not constitute an official claim to the Arctic seabed or the waters above it, that it has no legal effect, and that it therefore was a purely symbolic act. At a May 2008 meeting in Ilulissat, Greenland, the five Arctic coastal states reaffirmed their commitment to the UNCLOS legal framework for the establishment of extended continental shelf limits in the Arctic.370 (For further discussion, see “Extent of the Continental Margin” in “Oil, Gas, and Mineral Exploration.”) Territorial Disputes and Sovereignty Issues Aside from the extended continental shelf process, there are four unresolved Arctic territorial disputes:  Canada maintains that the part of the Northwest Passage that runs through the Canadian archipelago is an inland waterway, and therefore sovereign Canadian territory subject to Ottawa’s surveillance, regulation, and control. The United States, the European Union, and others maintain that these waters constitute an international strait between two high seas.  The United States and Canada have differing positions regarding their mutual maritime boundary in the Beaufort Sea part of the Arctic Ocean, north of the land border separating Alaska from Canada.371  In June 1990, the United States and Soviet Union (now Russia) signed an agreement—the U.S./USSR Maritime Boundary Agreement—regarding the delimitation of the U.S.-Soviet (now U.S.-Russian) maritime boundary in the Bering Sea. The U.S. Senate consented to the ratification of the pact on December 16, 1991.372 The Russian Duma has yet to approve the accord. The United States and Russia are applying the treaty on a provisional basis, pending its ratification by Russia.373 369 “Russia, Canada Make Competing Claims To Arctic Resources,” The Canadian Press, September 16, 2010. 370 “5 Countries Agree To Talk, Not Compete, Over the Arctic,” New York Times, May 29, 2008. 371 For additional (but unofficial and unverified) information on this issue, see the section entitled “Border Dispute” in “Beaufort Sea,” Wikipedia, accessed March 23, 2020, at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beaufort_Sea. 372 Treaty Document 101-22, see https://www.congress.gov/treaty-document/101st-congress/22. 373 The State Department states: No negotiations regarding the U.S.-Russia maritime boundary have occurred since 1990, when the Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 121  Denmark and Canada disagree over which country has the territorial right to Hans Island, a tiny, barren piece of rock between Greenland and Canada’s Ellesmere Island.374 In addition to these disputes, Norway and Russia had been at odds for decades over the boundary between the two in the so-called “Grey Zone” in the Barents Sea, an area believed to hold rich undersea deposits of petroleum. On September 15, 2010, Norwegian Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg and Russian President Dmitry Medvedev signed an agreement in Murmansk, a Russian city near the Norwegian border. The accord awards roughly half of the 175,000-square-kilometer area to each country; it spells out fishing rights, and provides for the joint development of future oil and gas finds that straddle the boundary line. Some observers believe it is noteworthy that Russia would concede sovereignty over such a large, resource-rich area to a small, neighboring country. But others have noted that Moscow may be hoping for Norwegian cooperation in developing offshore resources, and eventually in winning approval when Russia makes its Article 76 UNCLOS submission.375 In August 2010, Canadian Foreign Minister Lawrence Cannon announced a new “Statement of Canada’s Arctic Policy,” which reaffirmed the government’s commitment to Canada’s sovereignty in the region, to economic and social development, to environmental protection, and to empowerment of the peoples in the north. The statement also emphasized the government’s intention to negotiate settlements to its disputes with the United States over the Beaufort Sea boundary, and with Denmark over Hans Island. Minister Cannon declared that “making progress U.S.-USSR Maritime Boundary Agreement was signed. The negotiations that led to that agreement did not address the status of Wrangel Island, Herald Island, Bennett Island, Jeannette Island, or Henrietta Island, all of which lie off Russia’s Arctic coast, or Mednyy (Copper) Island or rocks off the coast of Mednyy Island in the Bering Sea. None of the islands or rocks above were included in the U.S. purchase of Alaska from Russia in 1867, and they have never been claimed by the United States, although Americans were involved in the discovery and exploration of some of them. The U.S.-USSR Maritime Boundary Agreement, signed by the United States and the Soviet Union on June 1, 1990, defines our maritime boundary in the Arctic Ocean, Bering Sea, and northern Pacific Ocean. The U.S.-USSR Maritime Boundary Agreement is a treaty that requires ratification by both parties before it formally enters into force. The treaty was made public at the time of its signing. In a separate exchange of diplomatic notes, the two countries agreed to apply the agreement provisionally. The United States Senate gave its advice and consent to ratification of the U.S.-USSR Maritime Boundary Agreement on September 16, 1991. The Russian Federation informed the United States Government by diplomatic note dated January 13, 1992, that it “continues to perform the rights and fulfill the obligations flowing from the international agreements” signed by the Soviet Union. The United States and the Russian Federation, which is considered to be the sole successor state to the treaty rights and obligations of the former Soviet Union for the purposes of the U.S.-USSR Maritime Boundary Agreement, are applying the treaty on a provisional basis, pending its ratification by the Russian Federation. The United States regularly holds discussions with Russia on Bering Sea issues, but these discussions do not affect the placement of the U.S.-Russia boundary or the jurisdiction over any territory or the sovereignty of any territory. The U.S. has no intention of reopening discussion of the 1990 Maritime Boundary Treaty. (U.S. Department of State, Archives, “Status of Wrangel and Other Arctic Islands,” Fact Sheet, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, May 20, 2003, accessed March 23, 2020, at https://2001-2009.state.gov/p/eur/rls/fs/20922.htm.) 374 For additional information, see Natalie Mychajlyszyn, The Arctic: Geopolitical Issues, Canadian Library of Parliament, October 24, 2008. 375 “Russia, Norway Sign Deal On Barents Sea Border, Seek More Development in Mineral-rich Arctic,” Associated Press, September 15, 2010. Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service R41153 · VERSION 162 · UPDATED 122 on outstanding boundary issues will be a top priority.”376 Also, despite their dispute over Hans Island, Canada and Denmark have been working together on Arctic issues. In May 2010, the two countries’ military chiefs of staffs signed a memorandum of understanding on Arctic Defense, Security, and Operational Cooperation, committing the two countries to “enhanced consultation, information exchange, visits, and exercises.”377 Author Information Ronald O'Rourke, Coordinator Specialist in Naval Affairs Jane A. Leggett Specialist in Energy and Environmental Policy Laura B. Comay Analyst in Natural Resources Jonathan L. Ramseur Specialist in Environmental Policy Peter Folger Specialist in Energy and Natural Resources Policy Pervaze A. Sheikh Specialist in Natural Resources Policy John Frittelli Specialist in Transportation Policy Harold F. Upton Analyst in Natural Resources Policy Marc Humphries Specialist in Energy Policy Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 376 Cannon quoted in “Canada Seeks To Settle Arctic Borders,” Agence France Presse, August 20, 2010. For additional information concerning Canada’s August statement on Arctic policy, see “Statement on Canada’s Arctic foreign policy: Exercising sovereignty and promoting Canada’s Northern Strategy abroad,” Foreign Affairs and International Trade Canada website, http://www.international.gc.ca/polar-polaire/canada_arctic_foreign_policy-la_politique_etrangere_du_canada_pour_arctique.aspx?lang=eng. 377 “Canada and Denmark Sign Arctic Cooperation Arrangement,” Targeted News Service, May 17, 2010. 		2020-05-06T12:33:52-0400
Army Future Vertical Lift (FVL) Program https://crsreports.congress.gov Updated April 29, 2020Army Future Vertical Lift (FVL) ProgramThe major combat rotorcraft platforms in U.S. inventory— the Chinook, Black Hawk, Apache, and Kiowa Warrior—are based on designs from the 1960s and 1970s. While several are still in production or remanufacture, the Army is leading DOD’s effort to move to a new generation of rotorcraft technology. The Future Vertical Lift (FVL) program is a research and development effort dedicated to discovering, investigating, and refining the technologies that is to provide the next generation of vertical lift aircraft for the United States Armed Forces. According to the Army, the goal of the program is to develop technologies that improve “maneuverability, range, speed, payload, survivability, reliability, and reduced logistical footprint” compared with current rotorcraft. The Army lists FVL as one of its top six modernization priorities. The Marine Corps and Navy also plan to use FVL-derived technology in their next-generation rotorcraft. Although the FVL effort is intended to benefit all services, and elements of the work are joint, the Army is the lead service, and most funding for the program is included in the Army’s R&D budget. FVL is in a fairly early stage, and aircraft likely to result from this program’s work are not expected to be operational until the early 2030s. However, in April 2018, then-Army Secretary Mark Esper directed the FVL team to determine whether promising technologies could be incorporated into a new aircraft within 10 years. History FVL officially began in 2009, and the strategic plan for the project was issued in October 2011. The pace of work has varied over time due to shifting Army budget priorities. The Army is also resolving an internal debate as to its priorities. While the FVL development focus had been on the medium-lift Black Hawk helicopter replacement, Army officials have more recently noted a larger capability gap in the attack/reconnaissance fleet, and are considering whether to shift focus to that smaller platform. FVL is currently looking at five basic categories (or “capability sets”) of aircraft varying in size, but the initial foci are a medium transport platform capable of succeeding the Army UH-60 Black Hawk and Marine H-1 “Huey” utility helicopters—the Future Long-Range Assault Aircraft (FLRAA)—and a scout platform roughly in the role of the current Apache, now called the Future Attack and Reconnaissance Aircraft (FARA). Heavy-lift variants may follow. FLRAA Bell and Sikorsky (with Boeing) have produced demonstrators for FLRAA. The two companies are taking different technology approaches to their efforts. The Bell V-280 (Figure 2) is a tiltrotor aircraft like the V-22 Osprey, with engines and rotors at the end of its wings that swivel. The Sikorsky/Boeing SB-1 (Figure 3) is a compound helicopter, using twin coaxial rotors to provide lift and a pusher propeller to enhance speed. Figure 1. FLRAA Schedule Source: FY2021 budget submission for Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Army. In the FY2020 Defense Appropriation Act, Congress added $75.6 million for competitive demonstration and risk reduction (CD&RR) in FVL, focused on FLRAA. The main step from technology demonstrators to competitive aircraft, CD&RR will be a two-year effort designed to prepare the competing systems for projected contract award in the second quarter of FY2022. On March 18, 2020, the Army granted Bell and Sikorsky CD&RR project agreements. Figure 2. Bell V-280 Valor Source: Bell. Army Future Vertical Lift (FVL) Program https://crsreports.congress.gov Figure 3. Sikorsky-Boeing SB-1 Defiant Source: Sikorsky. FARA Five competitors originally developed technologies for FARA. Those awards went to  AVX/L-3;  Bell;  Boeing;  Karem Aircraft/Raytheon/Northrop Grumman; and  Sikorsky. On March 25, 2020, the Army narrowed the competition to Sikorsky and Bell for the final design, build, and test phase, which is expected to provide the required data for a FARA contract award in FY2024. Sikorsky is already flying a prototype FARA, the S-97 Raider. Bell has revealed its FARA concept, the 360 Invictus. Figure 4. Sikorsky S-97 Raider Source: Sikorsky. Figure 5. Bell 360 Invictus Concept Source: Bell. Figure 6. FARA Schedule Source: FY2021 budget submission for Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Army. Funding FVL funding is carried in the Research and Development, Army budget in PE 0603801A, Aviation Advanced Development. That budget was funded at $107.6 million in FY2020; the FY2021 request is for $134.4 million, going to $653.7 million by FY2025. Separately, the FY2021 request for FARA (under the same PE) is $513.5 million. Since its inception, FVL has relied on investment by industry to advance its technologies. Although the companies have not released exact figures, they have consistently pushed for the Army to increase its commitment to the R&D phase and to define a deployment schedule and plan that could inform corporate investment decisions. Jeremiah Gertler, Specialist in Military Aviation IF11367 Army Future Vertical Lift (FVL) Program https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF11367 · VERSION 4 · UPDATED Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. https://crsreports.congress.gov/		2020-04-29T09:45:53-0400
Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs: Background and Issues for Congress Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs: Background and Issues for Congress Updated May 6, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov R43543 Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service Summary This report discusses two types of amphibious ships being procured for the Navy: LPD-17 Flight II class amphibious ships and LHA-type amphibious assault ships. Both types are built by Huntington Ingalls Industries/Ingalls Shipbuilding (HII/Ingalls) of Pascagoula, MS. The first LPD-17 Flight II class ship, LPD-30, was procured in FY2018; the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates its cost at $1,819.6 million (i.e., about $1.8 billion). LHA-type amphibious assault ships are procured once every few years. LHA-8 was procured in FY2017; the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates its cost at $3,832.0 million (i.e., about $3.8 billion). The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission presents the second LPD-17 Flight II amphibious ship, LPD-31, as a ship requested for procurement in FY2021, and the next amphibious assault ship, LHA-9, as a ship projected for procurement in FY2023. Consistent with congressional action on the Navy’s FY2020 budget, this CRS report treats LPD-31 and LHA-9 as ships that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and provided procurement—not advance procurement—funding for) in FY2020. The Department of Defense’s (DOD’s) decision to present LPD-31 and LHA-9 as ships requested for procurement in FY2021 and FY2023, respectively, even though Congress procured both ships in FY2020, poses a potentially significant institutional issue for Congress regarding the preservation and use of Congress’s power of the purse under Article 1 of the Constitution, and for maintaining Congress as a coequal branch of government relative to the executive branch. The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates the procurement cost of LPD-31 at $2,029.9 million (i.e., about $2.0 billion). The ship has received $874.1 million in prior-year procurement and advanced procurement (AP) funding, including $350 million that Congress provided in FY2020. The Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget requests the remaining $1,155.8 million needed to complete the ship’s estimated procurement cost. The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates the procurement cost of LHA-9, if procured in FY2023, at $3,873.5 million (i.e., about $3.9 billion). Congress provided $350 million for the ship in FY2019 and $650 million for the ship in FY2020. The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission, which the Navy submitted to Congress on February 10, acknowledges this funding but does not program any further funding for the ship until FY2023. On February 13, the Administration submitted a reprogramming action that transfers about $3.8 billion in DOD funding to Department of Homeland Security (DHS) counter-drug activities, commonly reported to mean the construction of the southern border wall. Included in this action is the $650 million that Congress appropriated in FY2020 for LHA-9. The reprogramming action acknowledges that LHA-9 is a congressional special interest item, meaning one that Congress funded at a level above what DOD had requested. (The Navy’s FY2020 budget submission programmed LHA-9’s procurement for FY2024 and requested no funding for the ship.) The reprogramming action characterizes the $650 million as “early to current programmatic need,” even though it would be needed for a ship whose construction would begin in FY2020. In discussing its FY2021 budget submission, Navy officials characterize LHA-9 not as a ship whose procurement the Navy is proposing to delay from FY2020 to FY2023, but as a ship whose procurement the Navy is proposing to accelerate from FY2024 (the ship’s procurement date under the Navy’s FY2020 budget submission) to FY2023. The administration’s reprogramming of the $650 million poses a potentially significant institutional issue for Congress regarding the preservation and use of Congress’s power of the purse under Article 1 of the Constitution, and for maintaining Congress as a coequal branch of government relative to the executive branch.Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Background ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Amphibious Ships in General ................................................................................................... 1 Roles and Missions ............................................................................................................. 1 Types of Amphibious Ships ................................................................................................ 2 Current Amphibious Force-Level Goal............................................................................... 2 Potential Change in Amphibious Force-Level Goal ........................................................... 3 Current and Projected Force Levels .................................................................................... 8 Existing LSD-41/49 Class Ships ......................................................................................... 8 Amphibious Warship Industrial Base .................................................................................. 9 LPD-17 Flight II Program ....................................................................................................... 10 Program Name .................................................................................................................. 10 Design ............................................................................................................................... 10 Procurement Quantity ........................................................................................................ 11 Procurement Schedule ....................................................................................................... 11 Procurement Cost .............................................................................................................. 12 LHA-9 Amphibious Assault Ship ............................................................................................ 12 Issues for Congress ........................................................................................................................ 13 Potential Impact of COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Situation ........................................................ 13 Procurement Dates of LPD-31 and LHA-9, and Congress’s Power of the Purse ................... 13 Reprogramming of $650 Million for LHA-9 and Congress’s Power of the Purse ................. 14 Potential Change in Required Number of LPD-17 Flight II and LHA-Type Ships ................ 15 Technical and Cost Risk in LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Programs .......................................... 15 Technical Risk ................................................................................................................... 15 Cost Risk ........................................................................................................................... 16 Legislative Activity for FY2021 .................................................................................................... 17 Summary of Congressional Action on FY2021 Funding Request .......................................... 17 Figures Figure 1. Potential New Light Amphibious Warhip (LAW) ............................................................ 7 Figure 2. Potential New Light Amphibious Warship (LAW) .......................................................... 7 Figure 3. Potential New Light Amphibious Warship (LAW) .......................................................... 8 Figure 4. LSD-41/49 Class Ship ...................................................................................................... 9 Figure 5. LPD-17 Flight II Design ................................................................................................. 11 Figure 6. LHA-8 Amphibious Assault Ship................................................................................... 12 Tables Table 1. Summary of Congressional Action on FY2021 Procurement Funding Request ............. 17 Appendixes Appendix. Procurement Dates of LPD-31 and LHA-9 ................................................................. 18 Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service Contacts Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 20 Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction This report provides background information and issues for Congress on two types of amphibious ships being procured for the Navy: LPD-17 Flight II class amphibious ships and LHA-type amphibious assault ships. Both types are built by Huntington Ingalls Industries/Ingalls Shipbuilding (HII/Ingalls) of Pascagoula, MS. The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission poses multiple issues for Congress concerning these two types of ships, including potentially significant institutional issues regarding the preservation and use of Congress’s power of the purse under Article 1 of the Constitution, and for maintaining Congress as a coequal branch of government relative to the executive branch. Congress’s decisions on the LPD-17 Flight II and LHA programs could also affect Navy capabilities and funding requirements and the shipbuilding industrial base. For an overview of the strategic and budgetary context in which amphibious ship and other Navy shipbuilding programs may be considered, see CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Background Amphibious Ships in General Roles and Missions Navy amphibious ships are operated by the Navy, with crews consisting of Navy personnel. The primary function of Navy amphibious ships is to lift (i.e., transport) embarked U.S. Marines and their equipment and supplies to distant operating areas, and enable Marines to conduct expeditionary operations ashore in those areas. Although amphibious ships are designed to support Marine landings against opposing military forces, they are also used for operations in permissive or benign situations where there are no opposing forces. Due to their large storage spaces and their ability to use helicopters and landing craft to transfer people, equipment, and supplies from ship to shore without need for port facilities,1 amphibious ships are potentially useful for a range of combat and noncombat operations.2 On any given day, some of the Navy’s amphibious ships, like some of the Navy’s other ships, are forward-deployed to various overseas operating areas. Forward-deployed U.S. Navy amphibious ships are often organized into three-ship formations called amphibious ready groups (ARGs).3 On 1 Amphibious ships have berthing spaces for Marines; storage space for their wheeled vehicles, their other combat equipment, and their supplies; flight decks and hangar decks for their helicopters and vertical take-off and landing (VTOL) fixed-wing aircraft; and well decks for storing and launching their landing craft. (A well deck is a large, garage-like space in the stern of the ship. It can be flooded with water so that landing craft can leave or return to the ship. Access to the well deck is protected by a large stern gate that is somewhat like a garage door.) 2 Amphibious ships and their embarked Marine forces can be used for launching and conducting humanitarian-assistance and disaster-response (HA/DR) operations; peacetime engagement and partnership-building activities, such as exercises; other nation-building operations, such as reconstruction operations; operations to train, advise, and assist foreign military forces; peace-enforcement operations; noncombatant evacuation operations (NEOs); maritime-security operations, such as anti-piracy operations; smaller-scale strike and counter-terrorism operations; and larger-scale ground combat operations. Amphibious ships and their embarked Marine forces can also be used for maintaining forward-deployed naval presence for purposes of deterrence, reassurance, and maintaining regional stability. 3 An ARG notionally includes three amphibious ships—one LHA or LHD, one LSD, and one LPD. These three Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 2 average, two or perhaps three ARGs might be forward-deployed at any given time. Amphibious ships are also sometimes forward-deployed on an individual basis to lower-threat operating areas, particularly for conducting peacetime engagement activities with foreign countries or for responding to smaller-scale or noncombat contingencies. Types of Amphibious Ships Navy amphibious ships can be divided into two main groups—the so-called “big-deck” amphibious assault ships, designated LHA and LHD, which look like medium-sized aircraft carriers, and the smaller (but still sizeable) amphibious ships designated LPD or LSD, which are sometimes called “small-deck” amphibious ships.4 The LHAs and LHDs have large flight decks and hangar decks for embarking and operating numerous helicopters and vertical or short takeoff and landing (V/STOL) fixed-wing aircraft, while the LSDs and LPDs have much smaller flight decks and hangar decks for embarking and operating smaller numbers of helicopters. The LHAs and LHDs, as bigger ships, in general can individually embark more Marines and equipment than the LSDs and LPDs. Current Amphibious Force-Level Goal The Navy’s 355-ship force-level goal, released in December 2016, calls for achieving and maintaining a 38-ship amphibious force that includes 12 LHA/LHD-type ships, 13 LPD-17 class ships, and 13 LSD/LPD-type ships (12+13+13).5 The goal for achieving and maintaining a force of 38 amphibious ships relates primarily to meeting wartime needs for amphibious lift. Navy and Marine Corps officials have testified in the past that fully meeting U.S. regional combatant commander requests for day-to-day forward deployments of amphibious ships would require a force of 50 or more amphibious ships.6 amphibious ships together can embark a Marine expeditionary unit (MEU) consisting of about 2,200 Marines, their aircraft, their landing craft, their combat equipment, and about 15 days’ worth of supplies. ARGs can operate in conjunction with carrier strike groups (CSGs) to form larger naval task forces; ARGs can also be broken up into individual ships that are sent to separate operating areas. 4 U.S. Navy amphibious ships have designations starting with the letter L, as in amphibious landing. LHA can be translated as landing ship, helicopter-capable, assault; LHD can be translated as landing ship, helicopter-capable, well deck; LPD can be translated as landing ship, helicopter platform, well deck; and LSD can be translated as landing ship, well deck. Whether noted in the designation or not, almost all these ships have well decks. The exceptions are LHAs 6 and 7, which do not have well decks and instead have expanded aviation support capabilities. For an explanation of well decks, see footnote 1. 5 For more on the Navy’s 355-ship force-level goal, see CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. For a more detailed review of the 38-ship force structure requirements, see Appendix A of archived CRS Report RL34476, Navy LPD-17 Amphibious Ship Procurement: Background, Issues, and Options for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 6 For example, in testimony to the Seapower and Projection Forces subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee on February 25, 2015, Marine Corps Lieutenant General Kenneth J. Glueck, Jr., Deputy Commandant for Combat Development and Integration and Commanding General of the Marine Corps Combat Development Command, stated that the number needed to fully meet regional combatant commander demands for forward-deployed amphibious ships is “close to 54.” (Source: Spoken testimony of Lieutenant General Glueck, as reflected in transcript of hearing.) Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 3 Potential Change in Amphibious Force-Level Goal Overview The Navy’s ship force-level goals, including its force-level goal for amphibious ships, are determined in a Navy analysis called a Force Structure Assessment (FSA). The Navy conducts a new FSA (or updates the most recent FSA) once every few years. The Navy recently completed a new FSA to succeed the one whose results were released in December 2016. Navy officials have stated that the new FSA is undergoing final review within DOD and may be released sometime during 2020.7 Statements from the Commandant of the Marine Corps suggest that the new FSA will change the Navy’s amphibious ship force to an architecture based on a new amphibious lift target and a new mix of amphibious ships. The current 38-ship amphibious ship force-level goal is intended to meet a requirement for having enough amphibious lift to lift the assault echelons of two Marine Expeditionary Brigades (MEBs), a requirement known as the 2.0 MEB lift requirement. The 2.0 MEB lift requirement dates to 2006. The translation of this lift requirement into a Marine Corps-preferred force-level goal of 38 ships dates to 2009, and the Navy’s formal incorporation of the 38-ship goal (rather than a more fiscally constrained goal of 33 or 34 ships) into the Navy’s overall ship force-structure goal dates to the 2016 FSA, the results of which were released in December 2016.8 In July 2019, General David H. Berger, the Commandant of the Marine Corps, released a document entitled Commandant’s Planning Guidance that states that the Marine Corp wants to, among other things, move away from the 38-ship amphibious ship force-level goal and the 2.0 MEB lift force-planning metric, and shift to a new and different mix of amphibious ships that includes not only LHA/LHD-type amphibious assault ships and LPD/LPD-type amphibious ships, but other kinds of ships as well, including smaller amphibious ships, ships like the Navy’s Expeditionary Sea Base (ESB) and Expeditionary Fast Transport (EPF) ships, ships based on commercial-ship hull designs, and unmanned surface vehicles (USVs). The Commandant’s Planning Guidance, which effectively announces a once-in-a-generation change in Marine Corps thinking on this and other issues relating to the Marine Corps, states in part (emphasis as in the original): Our Nation’s ability to project power and influence beyond its shores is increasingly challenged by long-range precision fires; expanding air, surface, and subsurface threats; and the continued degradation of our amphibious and auxiliary ship readiness. The ability to project and maneuver from strategic distances will likely be detected and contested from the point of embarkation during a major contingency. Our naval expeditionary forces must possess a variety of deployment options, including L-class [amphibious ships] and E-class [expeditionary ships] ships, but also increasingly look to other available options such as unmanned platforms, stern landing vessels, other ocean-going connectors, and smaller more lethal and more risk-worthy platforms. We must continue to seek the affordable and plentiful at the expense of the exquisite and few when conceiving of the future amphibious portion of the fleet. We must also explore new options, such as inter-theater connectors and commercially available ships and craft that are smaller and less expensive, thereby increasing the affordability and allowing acquisition at a greater quantity. We recognize that we must 7 For additional discussion of the FSA process and the next FSA, see CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 8 For additional discussion of the 2.0 MEB lift goal and earlier amphibious lift goals dating back to 1980, see Appendix A of, Navy LPD-17 Amphibious Ship Procurement: Background, Issues, and Options for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 4 distribute our forces ashore given the growth of adversary precision strike capabilities, so it would be illogical to continue to concentrate our forces on a few large ships. The adversary will quickly recognize that striking while concentrated (aboard ship) is the preferred option. We need to change this calculus with a new fleet design of smaller, more lethal, and more risk-worthy platforms. We must be fully integrated with the Navy to develop a vision and a new fleet architecture that can be successful against our peer adversaries while also maintaining affordability. To achieve this difficult task, the Navy and Marine Corps must ensure larger surface combatants possess mission agility across sea control, littoral, and amphibious operations, while we concurrently expand the quantity of more specialized manned and unmanned platforms…. We will no longer use a “2.0 MEB requirement” as the foundation for our arguments regarding amphibious ship building, to determine the requisite capacity of vehicles or other capabilities, or as pertains to the Maritime Prepositioning Force. We will no longer reference the 38-ship requirement memo from 2009, or the 2016 Force Structure Assessment, as the basis for our arguments and force structure CRS Report RL34476, Navy LPD-17 Amphibious Ship Procurement: Background, Issues, and Options for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourkejustifications. The ongoing 2019 Force Structure Assessment will inform the amphibious requirements based upon this guidance. The global options for amphibs [types of amphibious ships] include many more options than simply LHAs, LPDs, and LSDs. I will work closely with the Secretary of the Navy and Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) to ensure there are adequate numbers of the right types of ships, with the right capabilities, to meet national requirements. I do not believe joint forcible entry operations (JFEO) are irrelevant or an operational anachronism; however, we must acknowledge that different approaches are required given the proliferation of anti-access/area denial (A2AD) threat capabilities in mutually contested spaces. Visions of a massed naval armada nine nautical miles off-shore in the South China Sea preparing to launch the landing force in swarms of ACVs [amphibious combat vehicles], LCUs [utility landing craft], and LCACs [air-cushioned landing craft]are impractical and unreasonable. We must accept the realities created by the proliferation of precision long-range fires, mines, and other smart-weapons, and seek innovative ways to overcome those threat capabilities. I encourage experimentation with lethal long-range unmanned systems capable of traveling 200 nautical miles, penetrating into the adversary enemy threat ring, and crossing the shoreline—causing the adversary to allocate resources to eliminate the threat, create dilemmas, and further create opportunities for fleet maneuver. We cannot wait to identify solutions to our mine countermeasure needs, and must make this a priority for our future force development efforts…. Over the coming months, we will release a new concept in support of the Navy’s Distributed Maritime Operations (DMO) Concept and the NDS called – Stand-in Forces. The Stand-in Forces concept is designed to restore the strategic initiative to naval forces and empower our allies and partners to successfully confront regional hegemons that infringe on their territorial boundaries and interests. Stand-in Forces are designed to generate technically disruptive, tactical stand-in engagements that confront aggressor naval forces with an array of low signature, affordable, and risk-worthy platforms and payloads. Stand-in forces take advantage of the relative strength of the contemporary defense and rapidly-emerging new technologies to create an integrated maritime defense that is optimized to operate in close and confined seas in defiance of adversary long-range precision “stand-off capabilities.” Creating new capabilities that intentionally initiate stand-in engagements is a disruptive “button hook” in force development that runs counter to the action that our adversaries anticipate. Rather than heavily investing in expensive and exquisite capabilities that regional aggressors have optimized their forces to target, naval forces will persist forward with many smaller, low signature, affordable platforms that can economically host a dense array of lethal and nonlethal payloads. Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 5 By exploiting the technical revolution in autonomy, advanced manufacturing, and artificial intelligence, the naval forces can create many new risk-worthy unmanned and minimally-manned platforms that can be employed in stand-in engagements to create tactical dilemmas that adversaries will confront when attacking our allies and forces forward.9 Potential New Light Amphibious Warship (LAW) Program As one possible reflection of the potential change in the amphibious force-level goal discussed above, a February 20, 2020, press report about a potential new type of stern-landing amphibious ship called the Light Amphibious Warship (LAW) (Figure 1, Figure 2, and Figure 3) states The Navy’s research and development portfolio will devote $30 million to a “next-generation medium amphibious ship design” that will likely be based on an Australian designer’s stern landing vessel…. The Navy and Marines announced in the Fiscal Year 2021 budget request that they will seek a medium amphibious ship that can support the kind of dispersed, agile, constantly relocating force described in the Littoral Operations in Contested Environment (LOCE) and Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations (EABO) concepts the Marine Corps has written, as well as the overarching Distributed Maritime Operations (DMO) from the Navy. According to a budget overview document, “a next-generation medium amphibious ship will be a stern landing vessel to support amphibious ship-to-shore operations.” “FY 2021 funds support concept evaluation/design, industry studies and exploration for a medium-lift intra-theater amphibious support vessel. Efforts include requirements development, systems engineering, naval architecture and marine engineering, and operations research analysis,” reads a justification book that accompanies the budget request. The Navy and Marines had previously cited the Offshore Support Vessel as a possible inspiration for their new design…. However, since that time, Marine Corps planners took another look at the features they’d need on this medium amphibious ship, rather than limiting their talks to existing ship designs, USNI News understands. Those talks led to a realization that they not only wanted a ship that could move Marines around with some range, but they also wanted the ship to be able to beach itself like a landing craft does, to help offload gear and vehicles as needed. These talks led to a new focus on the stern landing vessel designed by Australian company Sea Transport, which could serve as the new inspiration for the medium amphibious vehicle as requirements development and EABO wargaming and simulations take place…. 9 U.S. Marine Corps, Commandant’s Planning Guidance, 38th Commandant of the Marine Corps, undated, released July 2019, pp. 4-5, 10. See also Megan Eckstein, “New Commandant Berger Sheds 38-Amphib Requirement in Quest to Modernize USMC for High-End Fight,” USNI News, July 18, 2019; Paul McLeary, “Sacred Cows Die As Marine Commandant Changes Course On Amphibs,” Breaking Defense, July 26, 2019; David Ignatius, “The Marines’ New Commandant Has Set the Bar for Real Military Reform,” Washington Post, August 8, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “Marine Planners Using Commandant’s Guidance to Start Crafting Future of the Corps,” USNI News, September 18, 2019; Shawn Snow, “An Unmanned Ship That Can Travel 500 Nautical Miles Without Resupply—the Corps Is Looking at It,” Marine Corps Times, September 19, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “Marines, Navy Both Considering Something Like an Offshore Support Vessel to Supplement Amphibs,” USNI News, September 20, 2019; David Axe, “U.S. Navy and Marine Corps Want Small Ships to Land Troops in a War,” National Interest, September 21, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “Navy, Marines Rethinking How to Build Future Fleet with Unmanned, Expeditionary Ships,” USNI News, September 26, 2019; David Barno and Nora Bensahel, “A Striking New Vision for the marines, and a Wakeup Call for the Other Services,” War on the Rocks, October 1, 2019; Megan Eckstein, “Berger: Marine 2030 Force Design Is Nearly Complete; Concepts Now Being Modeled, Tested,” USNI News, October 3, 2019; Patrick Tucker, “The Future of the Marines Is Smaller, More Robotic, More Naval,” Defense One, October 3, 2019. Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 6 The Navy and Marines are not committed yet to this design or to Sea Transport, but USNI News understands that something like a SLV would combine a surface ship’s ability to have great enough endurance and range to be operationally useful to commanders and a landing craft’s ability to beach itself to offload larger equipment.10 A March 26, 2020, press report stated: The Navy is asking industry for input on a future Light Amphibious Warship, as the Marine Corps recalculates its force design to prepare for a near-peer fight in the Pacific. A recent request for information says the Navy will hold a virtual industry day on April 9…. The Navy anticipates purchasing the first ships in fiscal year 2023, according to slides from the March 4 industry day. A preliminary schedule anticipates the service buying three vessels in FY-23, six in FY-24, 10 in FY-25 and nine in FY-26. The Navy also envisions utilizing a commercial design that it could alter for the military.11 A May 5, 2020, press report stated: The U.S. Navy wants to buy as many as 30 of a new class of Light Amphibious Warships that would be significantly smaller and cheaper to operate than its existing fleets of large amphibious ships. The service is already exploring possible designs, including a roll-on-roll-off type with a stern ramp.… Navy officials… said that the “objective number” of Light Amphibious Warships (LAW) it hopes to buy is between 28 and 30 at a briefing for defense industry representatives on Apr. 9, 2020…. The Navy is still in an information-gathering phase, but does already have some key requirements for any potential LAW design, which it expects to be about 200 feet long overall and have 8,000 square feet of cargo space in total. Each LAW will have a crew of no more than 40 sailors and be able to accommodate at least 75 Marines…. The Navy says that it is willing to consider either adapting an existing commercial design, using a commercial hullform as a starting place, or a so-called “Build to Print” ship based on proven design elements and components. The goal in all of these courses of action is to focus on relatively low-risk, low-cost, mature designs, or at least design features, in order to both keep the ships cheap and make them faster and easier to build. The Navy has said it is interested in awarding at least one preliminary design contract by the end of this year with the hope that it could begin buying actual ships as early as late 2022. The service has also indicated that it might be willing to accept ship designs with relatively short expected service lives in order to help keep production costs low and speed up construction. The requirements now say that the LAWs have to have a life span of just 10 years, at a minimum.12 10 Megan Eckstein, “Navy Researching New Class of Medium Amphibious Ship, New Logistics Ships,” USNI News, February 20, 2020. See also Rich Abott, “FY 2021 Request Starts Work on Future Amphibs and Logistics Ships,” Defense Daily, February 20, 2020; David Axe, “This Weird Little Ship Could Be the Future of Amphibious Warfare,” National Interest, February 24, 2020. 11 Mallory Shellbourne, “Navy begins pursuit of Light Amphibious Warship,” Inside Defense, March 26, 2020. 12 Joseph Trevithick, “Navy Wants To Buy 30 New Light Amphibious Warships To Support Radical Shift In Marine Ops,” The Drive, May 5, 2020. Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 7 Figure 1. Potential New Light Amphibious Warhip (LAW) Artist’s rendering Source: Illustration accompanying Megan Eckstein, “Navy Researching New Class of Medium Amphibious Ship, New Logistics Ships,” USNI News, February 20, 2020. Figure 2. Potential New Light Amphibious Warship (LAW) Artist’s rendering Source: Illustration accompanying David Axe, “This Weird Little Ship Could Be the Future of Amphibious Warfare,” National Interest, February 24, 2020. Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 8 Figure 3. Potential New Light Amphibious Warship (LAW) Artist’s rendering Source: Illustration accompanying Joseph Trevithick, “Navy Wants To Buy 30 New Light Amphibious Warships To Support Radical Shift In Marine Ops,” The Drive, May 5, 2020. Current and Projected Force Levels The Navy’s force of amphibious ships at the end of FY2019 included 32 ships, including 9 amphibious assault ships (1 LHA and 8 LHDs), 11 LPD-17 Flight I ships, and 12 LSD-41/49 class ships. The LSD-41/49 class ships, which are the ships to be replaced by LPD-17 Flight II ships, are discussed in the next section. The Navy’s FY2020 30-year (FY2020-FY2049) shipbuilding plan projects that the Navy’s force of amphibious ships will increase gradually to 38 ships by FY2026, remain at a total of 36 to 38 ships in FY2027 to FY2034, decline to 34 or 35 ships in FY2035-FY2038, increase to 36 or 37 ships in FY2039-FY2046, and remain at 35 ships in FY2047-FY2049. Over the entire 30-year period, the force is projected to include an average of about 35.8 ships, or about 94% of the required figure of 38 ships, although the resulting amount of lift capability provided by the ships would not necessarily equate to about 94% of the amphibious lift goal, due to the mix of ships in service at any given moment and their individual lift capabilities. Existing LSD-41/49 Class Ships The Navy’s 12 aging Whidbey Island/Harpers Ferry (LSD-41/49) class ships (Figure 4) were procured between FY1981 and FY1993 and entered service between 1985 and 1998.13 The class 13 The class was initially known as the Whidbey Island (LSD-41) class. The final four ships in the class, beginning with Harpers Ferry (LSD-49), were built to a modified version of the original LSD-41 design, prompting the name of the class to be changed to the Harpers Ferry/Whidbey Island (LSD-41/49) class. Some sources refer to these 12 ships as two separate classes. The first three were built by Lockheed Shipbuilding of Seattle, WA, a firm that subsequently exited the Navy shipbuilding business. The final nine were built by Avondale Shipyards of New Orleans, LA, a Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 9 includes 12 ships because they were built at a time when the Navy was planning a 36-ship (12+12+12) amphibious force. They have an expected service life of 40 years; the first ship will reach that age in 2025. The Navy’s FY2020 30-year shipbuilding plan projects that the 12 ships will retire between FY2026 and FY2038. Amphibious Warship Industrial Base Huntington Ingalls Industries/Ingalls Shipbuilding (HII/Ingalls) of Pascagoula, MS, is the Navy’s current builder of both LPDs and LHA-type ships, although other U.S. shipyards could also build amphibious ships.14 The amphibious warship industrial base also includes many supplier firms in numerous U.S. states that provide materials and components for Navy amphibious ships. HII states that the supplier base for its LHA production line, for example, includes 457 companies in 39 states.15 Figure 4. LSD-41/49 Class Ship Source: U.S. Navy photo accessed May 7, 2014, at http://www.navy.mil/gallery_search_results.asp?terms=lsd+52&page=4&r=4. The Navy’s caption for the photo states that the photo is dated July 13, 2013, and that it shows the Pearl Harbor (LSD-52) anchored off Majuro atoll in the Republic of the Marshall Islands during an exercise called Pacific Partnership 2013. shipyard that eventually became part of the shipbuilding firm Huntington Ingalls Industries (HII). Avondale, like Lockheed Shipbuilding, no longer builds Navy ships. HII wound down Navy shipbuilding operations at Avondale in 2014, after Avondale finished building LPD-25, the ninth LPD-17 class ship. HII continues to operate two other shipyards that build Navy ships—Ingalls Shipbuilding in Pascagoula, MS (HII/Ingalls), and Newport News Shipbuilding in Newport News, VA (HII/NNS). HII’s construction of amphibious ships, previously divided between Avondale and Ingalls, now takes place primarily at Ingalls. 14 Amphibious ships could also be built by U.S. shipyards such as HII/Newport News Shipbuilding (HII/NNS) of Newport News, VA; General Dynamics/National Steel and Shipbuilding Company (GD/NASSCO) of San Diego, CA; and (for LPDs at least) General Dynamics/Bath Iron Works (GD/BIW) of Bath, ME. The Navy over the years has from time to time conducted competitions among shipyards for contracts to build amphibious ships. 15 Source: HII statement as quoted in Frank Wolfe, “Navy Budget Plan Delays Buy of Amphibious Ships,” Defense Daily, March 15, 2019. Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 10 LPD-17 Flight II Program Program Name The Navy decided in 2014 that the LSD-41/49 replacement ships would be built to a variant of the design of the Navy’s San Antonio (LPD-17) class amphibious ships. (A total of 13 LPD-17 class ships [LPDs 17 through 29] were procured between FY1996 and FY2017.) Reflecting that decision, the Navy announced on April 10, 2018, that the replacement ships would be known as the LPD-17 Flight II ships.16 By implication, the Navy’s original LPD-17 design became the LPD-17 Flight I design. The first LPD-17 Flight II ship is designated LPD-30. Subsequent LPD-17 Flight II ships are to be designated LPD-31, LPD-32, and so on. Whether the LPD-17 Flight II ships constitute their own shipbuilding program or an extension of the original LPD-17 shipbuilding program might be a matter of perspective. As a matter of convenience, this CRS report refers to the Flight II shipbuilding effort as a separate program. Years from now, LPD-17 Flight I and Flight II ships might come to be known collectively as either the LPD-17 class, the LPD-17/30 class, or the LPD-17 and LPD-30 classes. On October 10, 2019, the Navy announced that LPD-30, the first LPD-17 Flight II ship, will be named Harrisburg, for the city of Harrisburg, PA.17 As a consequence, LPD-17 Flight II, if treated as a separate class, would be referred to as Harrisburg (LPD-30) class ships. Design Compared to the LPD-17 Flight I design, the LPD-17 Flight II design (Figure 5) is somewhat less expensive to procure, and in some ways less capable—a reflection of how the Flight II design was developed to meet Navy and Marine Corps operational requirements while staying within a unit procurement cost target that had been established for the program.18 In many other respects, however, the LPD-17 Flight II design is similar in appearance and capabilities to the LPD-17 Flight I design. Of the 13 LPD-17 Flight I ships, the final two (LPDs 28 and 29) incorporate some 16 Megan Ecsteain, “Navy Designates Upcoming LX(R) Amphibs as San Antonio-Class LPD Flight II,” USNI News, April 11, 2018. Within a program to build a class of Navy ships, the term flight refers to a group of ships within the class that are built to a particular version of the class design. The LPD-17 Fight II program was previously known as the LX(R) program. In the designation LX(R), the X meant that the exact design of the ship had not yet been determined, and the R meant that the ships are intended as replacements for the LSD-41/49 class ships. Prior to being referred to as the LX(R) program, the program was referred to as the LSD(X) program, meaning an LSD-type ship whose design had not yet been determined. The program’s designation was changed to LX(R) in 2012 to signal that the replacement for the existing LSD-41/49 class ships would be an amphibious ship that would best meet future Navy and Marine Corps needs, regardless of whether that turned out to be a ship that one might refer to as an LSD. For an article discussing this earlier change in the program’s designation, see Christopher P. Cavas, “Different Missions Might Await New USN Amphib,” Defense News, November 12, 2012. 17 Secretary of the Navy Public Affairs, “SECNAV Names Future Amphibious Transport Dock Ship in Honor of the city of Harrisburg, Pennsylvania,” Navy News Service, October 10, 2019. 18 The Navy’s unit procurement cost targets for the LPD-17 Flight II program were $1,643 million in constant FY2014 dollars for the lead ship, and an average of $1,400 million in constant FY2014 dollars for ships 2 through 11. (Source: Navy briefing on LX(R) program to CRS and CBO, March 23, 2015.) The cost target for the lead ship was greater than the cost target for the subsequent ships primarily because the procurement cost of the lead ship incorporates much or all of the detail design and nonrecurring engineering (DD/NRE) costs for the program. Incorporating much or all of the DD/NRE costs of for a shipbuilding program into the procurement cost of the lead ship in the program is a traditional Navy shipbuilding budgeting practice. Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 11 design changes that make them transitional ships between the Flight I design and the Flight II design. Procurement Quantity Consistent with the Navy’s 38-ship amphibious force-level goal, the Navy wants to procure a total of 13 LPD-17 Flight II ships. Procurement Schedule Overview The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission presents the second LPD-17 Flight II amphibious ship, LPD-31, as a ship requested for procurement in FY2021. Consistent with congressional action on the Navy’s FY2020 budget, this CRS report treats LPD-31 as a ship that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and provided procurement—not advance procurement—funding for) in FY2020. (For additional discussion, see the Appendix.)19 Under the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission, the third and fourth LPD-17 Flight II class ships (i.e., LPDs 32 and 33) are programmed for procurement in FY2023 and FY2025. Figure 5. LPD-17 Flight II Design Artist’s rendering Source: Huntington Ingalls Industries rendering accessed April 22, 2019, at https://www.huntingtoningalls.com/lpd-flight-ii/. 19 An appendix in another CRS report—CRS Report RL32109, Navy DDG-51 and DDG-1000 Destroyer Programs: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke—provides a similar discussion regarding the procurement dates of LPD-31 and LHA-9, and includes an additional discussion of the procurement date of a third ship, the aircraft carrier CVN-81. Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 12 Procurement Cost The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates the procurement costs of LPDs 30, 31, 32, and 33 as $1,819.6 million, $2,029.9 million, $1,847.6 million, and $1,864.7 million, respectively (i.e., about $1.8 billion, $2,0 billion, $1.8 billion, and $1.9 billion, respectively). LHA-9 Amphibious Assault Ship LHA-type amphibious assault ships are procured once every few years. LHA-8 (Figure 6) was procured in FY2017; the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates its cost at $3,832.0 million (i.e., about $3.8 billion). Figure 6. LHA-8 Amphibious Assault Ship Artist’s rendering Source: Photo accompanying Tyler Rogoway, “The Next America Class Amphibious Assault Ship Will Almost Be In a Class of its Own,” The Drive, April 17, 2018. A note on the photo credits the photo to HII. The Navy’s FY2020 budget submission projected the procurement of the next amphibious assault ship, LHA-9, for FY2024. Some in Congress have been interested in accelerating the procurement of LHA-9 from FY2024 to an earlier year, such as FY2020 or FY2021, in part to achieve better production learning curve benefits in shifting from production of LHA-8 to LHA-9 and thereby reduce LHA-9’s procurement cost in real (i.e., inflation-adjusted) terms. As part of its action on the Navy’s proposed FY2019 budget, Congress provided $350 million in unrequested advance procurement (AP) funding for LHA-9, in part to encourage the Navy to accelerate the procurement of LHA-9 from FY2024 to an earlier fiscal year, such as FY2020 or FY2021. As part of its action on the Navy’s proposed FY2020 budget, Congress provided an additional $650 million in procurement (not AP) funding for the ship, and included a provision (Section 127) in the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (S. 1790/P.L. 116-92 of December 20, 2019) that authorizes the Navy to enter into a contract for the procurement of LHA-9 and to use incremental funding provided during the period FY2019-FY2025 to fund the contract. Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 13 The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission presents LHA-9 as a ship projected for procurement in FY2023. Consistent with the above-noted congressional action on the Navy’s FY2020 budget, this CRS report treats LHA-9 as a ship that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and provided procurement—not advance procurement—funding for) in FY2020. (For additional discussion, see Appendix.)20 The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission estimates the procurement cost of LHA-9, if procured in FY2023, at $3,873.5 million (i.e., about $3.9 billion). The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission, which the Navy submitted to Congress on February 10, acknowledges the $350 million in FY2019 advanced procurement (AP) funding and $650 million in FY2020 procurement funding that Congress provided for the ship, but does not program any further funding for the ship until FY2023. On February 13, the Administration submitted a reprogramming action that transfers about $3.8 billion in DOD funding to Department of Homeland Security (DHS) counter-drug activities, commonly reported to mean the construction of the southern border wall. Included in this action is the $650 million that Congress appropriated in FY2020 for LHA-9.21 The reprogramming action acknowledges that LHA-9 is a congressional special interest item, meaning one that Congress funded at a level above what DOD had requested. (The Navy’s FY2020 budget submission requested no funding for the ship.) The reprogramming action characterizes the $650 million as “early to current programmatic need,” even though it would be needed for a ship whose construction would begin in FY2020. In discussing its FY2021 budget submission, Navy officials characterize LHA-9 not as ship whose procurement the Navy is proposing to delay from FY2020 to FY2023, but as a ship whose procurement the Navy is proposing to accelerate from FY2024 (the ship’s procurement date under the Navy’s FY2020 budget submission) to FY2023. Issues for Congress Potential Impact of COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Situation One issue for Congress concerns the potential impact of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) situation on the execution of U.S. military shipbuilding programs, including the LPD-17 Flight II and LHA programs. For additional discussion of this issue, see CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. Procurement Dates of LPD-31 and LHA-9, and Congress’s Power of the Purse A potentially significant institutional issue for Congress concerns the treatment in the Navy’s proposed FY2021 budget of the procurement dates of LPD-31 and LHA-9. As discussed earlier, the Navy’s FY2021 budget submission presents LPD-31 as a ship requested for procurement in FY2021 and LHA-9 as a ship projected for procurement in FY2023. Consistent with congressional action on the Navy’s FY2020 budget regarding the procurement of LPD-31 and 20 An appendix in another CRS report—CRS Report RL32109, Navy DDG-51 and DDG-1000 Destroyer Programs: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke—provides a similar discussion regarding the procurement dates of LPD-31 and LHA-9, and includes an additional discussion of the procurement date of a third ship, the aircraft carrier CVN-81. 21 Department of Defense, Reprogramming action (form DD 1415), DOD Serial Number FY 20-01 RA, February 13, 2020, page 3 of 5. Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 14 LHA-9 (see the Appendix), this CRS report treats LPD-31 and LHA-9 as ships that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and provided procurement funding for) in FY2020. Potential oversight issues for Congress include the following:  By presenting LPD-31 as a ship requested for procurement in FY2021 (instead of a ship that was procured in FY2020) and LHA-9 as a ship projected for procurement in FY2023 (instead of a ship that was procured in FY2020), is DOD, in its FY2021 budget submission, disregarding or mischaracterizing the actions of Congress regarding the procurement dates of these three ships? If so:  Is DOD doing this to inflate the apparent number of ships requested for procurement in FY2021 and the apparent number of ships included in the five-year (FY2021-FY2025) shipbuilding plan?  Could this establish a precedent for DOD or other parts of the executive branch in the future to disregard or mischaracterize the actions of Congress regarding the procurement or program-initiation dates for other Navy ships, other Navy programs, other DOD programs, or other federal programs? If so, what implications might that have for the preservation and use of Congress’s power of the purse under Article 1 of the Constitution, and for maintaining Congress as a coequal branch of government relative to the executive branch? Reprogramming of $650 Million for LHA-9 and Congress’s Power of the Purse Another potentially significant institutional issue for Congress concerns the Administration’s reprogramming of $650 million in FY2020 procurement funding for LHA-9 to DHS counter-drug activities, commonly reported to mean the construction of the southern border wall, even though the reprogramming action acknowledges that LHA-9 is a congressional special interest item, meaning one that Congress funded at a level above what DOD had requested. As discussed earlier, some in Congress have been interested in accelerating the procurement of LHA-9 from FY2024 to an earlier year, such as FY2020 or FY2021, and Congress has provided funding in both FY2019 and FY2020 in support of that goal. Potential oversight issues for Congress include the following:  By reprogramming this funding to another purpose, is DOD, in its FY2021 budget submission, disregarding the expressed intent of Congress regarding the procurement of LHA-9?  If so, could this establish a precedent for DOD or other parts of the executive branch in the future to disregard the intent of Congress regarding the procurement or program-initiation dates for other Navy ships, other Navy programs, other DOD programs, or other federal programs? What implications might that have for the preservation and use of Congress’s power of the purse under Article 1 of the Constitution, and for maintaining Congress as a coequal branch of government relative to the executive branch? Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 15 Potential Change in Required Number of LPD-17 Flight II and LHA-Type Ships Another potential issue for Congress is whether the Navy’s next FSA will change the required number of LPD-17 Flight II and LHA-type amphibious ships, and if so, whether that might change Navy plans for procuring these ships in future fiscal years. As discussed earlier, statements from the Commandant of the Marine Corps suggest that the new FSA that is to be completed by the end of 2019 might change the Navy’s amphibious ship force to an architecture based on a new amphibious lift target and a new mix of amphibious ships. Technical and Cost Risk in LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Programs Another potential issue for Congress is technical and cost risk in the LPD-17 Flight II and LHA programs. Technical Risk Regarding technical risk in the LPD-17 Flight II program, a May 2019 Government Accountability Office (GAO) report—the 2019 edition of GAO’s annual report surveying DOD major acquisition programs—states the following about the LPD-17 Flight II program: Current Status The Navy planned to accelerate purchase of LPD 30—the first fully configured Flight II ship—after Congress appropriated $1.8 billion above the fiscal year 2018 budget request, according to program officials. The Navy reported that it awarded contracts in August 2018 for LPD 30 long lead time materials and in March 2019 for lead ship construction. The Navy based the Flight II design on Flight I, with modifications to reduce costs and meet new requirements. According to program officials, roughly 200 design changes will distinguish the two flights including replacing the composite mast with a steel stick. Officials stated that the design would not rely on any new technologies. However, the Navy plans to install a new radar, the Enterprise Air Surveillance Radar, which is still in development. The Navy expects live radar system testing through November 2019, with a complete radar prototype in February 2020. Although program officials consider these activities to be low risk, the Navy will make its decision to begin ship construction by December 2019 without incorporating lessons learned from radar testing into the design. Starting construction before stabilizing the design could require the Navy to absorb costly design changes and rework during ship construction. The Navy initially pursued a limited competition for LX(R), but now has a non-competitive acquisition strategy for LPD 17 Flight II. The Navy plans to award sole-source contracts to Huntington Ingalls—the only shipbuilder of Flight I ships—for Flight II construction. Further, the program did not request a separate independent cost estimate for Flight II prior to awarding the LPD 30 detail design and construction contract. At the same time, the Navy identified no plans to establish a cost baseline specific to Flight II. Without this baseline, the Navy would report full LPD 17 program costs—rather than Flight II specific costs—constraining visibility into Flight II. Program Office Comments We provided a draft of this assessment to the program office for review and comment. The program office provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate The program office stated that LPD Flight II is included under the existing LPD 17 acquisition Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 16 program baseline, and that no other viable contractor responded to a public notice regarding the Navy’s plan to award Huntington Ingalls the LPD 30 construction contract.22 Regarding technical risk in the LHA program, the May 2019 GAO report stated the following about the LHA program: Current Status In June 2017, the Navy exercised a contract option for detail design and construction of the LHA 8. The LHA 8 incorporates significant design changes from earlier ships in the LHA 6 class, but Navy officials were unable to quantify the changes. The Navy started construction in October 2018 and LHA 8 is scheduled to be delivered in January 2024. The LHA 8 program office has not identified any critical technologies. However, the ship is relying on technology that is currently being developed by another Navy program, the Enterprise Air Surveillance Radar (EASR), with delivery expected in August 2021. EASR, intended to provide self-defense and situational awareness capabilities, is derived from the pre-existing Air and Missile Defense Radar program, but will be a different size and will rotate. LHA 8 program officials have identified the radar as the program’s highest development risk. If the radar is not delivered on schedule, Navy officials report that this could lead to out-of-sequence design and delayed installation and testing. Officials responsible for developing the radar, however, stated that the radar is approaching maturity and is on schedule to be delivered to the shipbuilder when needed. The Navy began construction with about 61 percent of the LHA 8 product model completed—an approach inconsistent with shipbuilding best practices. These best practices call for 100 percent completion of 3D product modeling prior to construction start to minimize the likelihood of costly re-work and out of sequence work that can drive schedule delays. The Navy, however, estimates that the LHA 8 shipbuilder will not complete 100 percent of the ship’s 3D product model until June 2019, almost 8 months after the start of construction. Program Office Comments We provided a draft of this assessment to the program office for review and comment. The program office provided technical comments, which we incorporated where appropriate. The program office stated that the Navy understands all design changes incorporated on the LHA 8, such as reintroducing the well deck and incorporating EASR. According to the program office, the Navy does not begin construction on any section of the LHA 8 ship before completing that respective section’s design.23 Cost Risk Regarding cost risk in the LPD-17 Flight II program, an October 2019 Congressional Budget Office (CBO) report on the cost of the Navy’s shipbuilding programs states the following: The Navy estimates that the LPD-17 Flight IIs would cost $1.6 billion each, on average, and that the lead ship would cost $1.7 billion to $1.8 billion.… To achieve its cost goal for the LPD-17 Flight II, the Navy plans to further alter the LPD-17 design and, perhaps, to change the way it buys them: The Flight II variant would have substantially less capability than the LPD-17 class, and the Navy might use block-buy or multiyear authority to purchase the ships, although it has not yet stated an intention to do so. Such authority would commit the government to buying a group of ships over several years, thereby realizing 22 Government Accountability Office, Weapon Systems Annual Assessment, Limited Use of Knowledge-Based Practices Continues to Undercut DOD’s Investments, GAO-19-336SP, May 2019, p. 134. 23 Government Accountability Office, Weapon Systems Annual Assessment, Limited Use of Knowledge-Based Practices Continues to Undercut DOD’s Investments, GAO-19-336SP, May 2019, p. 133. Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 17 savings as a result of the predictable and steady work provided to the construction shipyard and to the vendors that provide parts and components to the shipbuilder. The authority would be similar to that provided for the Arleigh Burke class destroyers, Virginia class attack submarines, and LCSs [Littoral Combat Ships]. CBO estimates that the LPD-17 Flight II class would cost an average of $1.9 billion per ship. The agency [CBO] used the existing LPD-17 hull as the starting point for its estimate and then adjusted the ship’s size to reflect the reduced capability it expects for the Flight II. CBO’s estimate reflects the assumption that the Navy would ultimately use multiyear or block-buy procurement authority to purchase the ships.24 Regarding cost risk in the LHA program, the October 2019 CBO report states the following: The Navy estimates that the LHA-6 class amphibious assault ships would cost $3.4 billion each …. Under the 2020 plan, a seven-year gap separates the last LHA-6 class ship ordered in 2017 and the next one, slated to be purchased in 2024, which in CBO’s estimation would effectively eliminate any manufacturing learning gleaned from building the first 3 ships of the class. As a result, CBO’s estimate is higher than the Navy’s, at $3.9 billion per ship.25 Legislative Activity for FY2021 Summary of Congressional Action on FY2021 Funding Request Table 1 summarizes congressional action on the Navy’s FY2021 funding request for LPD-31 and LHA-9. Table 1. Summary of Congressional Action on FY2021 Procurement Funding Request Millions of dollars, rounded to nearest tenth Request Authorization Appropriation HASC SASC Conf. HAC SAC Conf. LPD-31 1,155.8 LHA-9 0 Source: Table prepared by CRS based on Navy’s FY2021 budget submission, committee and conference reports, and explanatory statements on FY2021 National Defense Authorization Act and FY2021 DOD Appropriations Act. Notes: HASC is House Armed Services Committee; SASC is Senate Armed Services Committee; HAC is House Appropriations Committee; SAC is Senate Appropriations Committee; Conf. is conference agreement. 24 Congressional Budget Office, An Analysis of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2020 Shipbuilding Plan, October 2019, pp. 26-27. 25 Congressional Budget Office, An Analysis of the Navy’s Fiscal Year 2020 Shipbuilding Plan, October 2019, p. 26. Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 18 Appendix. Procurement Dates of LPD-31 and LHA-9 This appendix presents background information on congressional action regarding the procurement dates of LPD-31 and LHA-9. In reviewing the bullet points presented below, it can be noted that procurement funding is funding for a ship that is either being procured in that fiscal year or has been procured in a prior fiscal year, while advance procurement (AP) funding is funding for a ship that is to be procured in a future fiscal year.26 LPD-31—an LPD-17 Flight II Amphibious Ship The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission presents LPD-31, an LPD-17 Flight II amphibious ship, as a ship requested for procurement in FY2021. This CRS report treats LPD-31 as a ship that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and provided procurement funding for) in FY2020, consistent with the following congressional action on the Navy’s FY2020 budget regarding the procurement of LPD-31:  The House Armed Services Committee’s report (H.Rept. 116-120 of June 19, 2019) on H.R. 2500, the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act, recommended authorizing the procurement of an LPD-17 Flight II ship in FY2020, showing a quantity increase of one ship above the Navy’s request and recommending procurement (not just AP) funding for the program.27  The Senate Armed Services Committee’s report (S.Rept. 116-48 of June 11, 2019) on S. 1790, the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act, recommended authorizing the procurement of an LPD-17 Flight II ship in FY2020, showing a quantity increase of one ship above the Navy’s request and recommending procurement (rather than AP) funding for the program.28  The conference report (H.Rept. 116-333 of December 9, 2019) on S. 1790/P.L. 116-92 of December 20, 2019, the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act, authorized the procurement of an LPD-17 Flight II ship in FY2020, showing a quantity increase of one ship above the Navy’s request and recommending procurement (rather than AP) funding for the program.29 Section 129 of S. 1790/P.L. 116-92 authorizes the Navy to enter into a contract, beginning in FY2020, for the procurement of LPD-31, and to use incremental funding to fund the contract.  The Senate Appropriations Committee’s report (S.Rept. 116-103 of September 12, 2019) on S. 2474, the FY2020 DOD Appropriations Act, recommended funding for the procurement of an LPD-17 Flight II ship in FY2020, showing a quantity increase of one ship above the Navy’s request and recommending procurement (rather than AP) funding for the program.30  The final version of the FY2020 DOD Appropriations Act (Division A of H.R. 1158/P.L. 116-93 of December 20, 2019) provides procurement (not AP) funding for an LPD-17 Flight II ship. The paragraph in this act that appropriates funding 26 For additional discussion, see CRS Report RL31404, Defense Procurement: Full Funding Policy—Background, Issues, and Options for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke and Stephen Daggett. 27 H.Rept. 116-120, p. 379, line 012. 28 S.Rept. 116-48, p. 433, line 12. See also pp. 23-24 for associated report language. 29 H.Rept. 116-333, p. 1566, line 012. See also p. 1144 for associated report language. 30 S.Rept. 116-103, p. 118, line 12. See also p. 122 for associated report language. Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service 19 for the Navy’s shipbuilding account, including this ship, includes a provision stating “Provided further, That an appropriation made under the heading ‘Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy’ provided for the purpose of ‘Program increase—advance procurement for fiscal year 2020 LPD Flight II and/or multiyear procurement economic order quantity’ shall be considered to be for the purpose of ‘Program increase—advance procurement of LPD–31’.” This provision relates to funding appropriated in the FY2019 DOD Appropriations Act (Division A of H.R. 6157/P.L. 115-245 of September 28, 2018) for the procurement of an LPD-17 Flight II ship in FY2020, as originally characterized in the explanatory statement accompanying that act.31 LHA-9 Amphibious Assault Ship The Navy’s FY2021 budget submission presents the amphibious assault ship LHA-9 as a ship projected for procurement in FY2023. This CRS report treats LHA-9 as a ship that Congress procured (i.e., authorized and provided procurement funding for) in FY2020, consistent with the following congressional action on the Navy’s FY2020 budget regarding the procurement of LHA-9:  The Senate Armed Services Committee’s report (S.Rept. 116-48 of June 11, 2019) on S. 1790, the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act, recommended authorizing the procurement of LHA-9 in FY2020, showing a quantity increase of one ship above the Navy’s request and recommending procurement (rather than AP) funding for the program.32  The conference report (H.Rept. 116-333 of December 9, 2019) on S. 1790/P.L. 116-92 of December 20, 2019, the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act, authorized the procurement of LHA-9 in FY2020, showing a quantity increase of one ship above the Navy’s request and recommending procurement (rather than AP) funding for the program.33 Section 127 of S. 1790/P.L. 116-92 authorizes the Navy to enter into a contract for the procurement of LHA-9 and to use incremental funding provided during the period FY2019-FY2025 to fund the contract.  The Senate Appropriations Committee’s report (S.Rept. 116-103 of September 12, 2019) on S. 2474, the FY2020 DOD Appropriations Act, recommended funding for the procurement of an LHA amphibious assault ship in FY2020, showing a quantity increase of one ship above the Navy’s request and recommending procurement (rather than AP) funding for the program.34  The final version of the FY2020 DOD Appropriations Act (Division A of H.R. 1158/P.L. 116-93 of December 20, 2019) provides procurement (not AP) funding for an LHA amphibious assault ship. The explanatory statement for Division A of H.R. 1158/P.L. 116-93 states that the funding is for LHA-9.35 31 See PDF page 176 of 559, line 12, of the explanatory statement for H.R. 6157/P.L. 115-245. 32 S.Rept. 116-48, p. 433, line 15. 33 H.Rept. 116-333, p. 1566, line 015. 34 S.Rept. 116-103, p. 118, line 15. 35 Explanatory statement for Division A of H.R. 1158, PDF page 175 of 414, line 15. Navy LPD-17 Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs Congressional Research Service R43543 · VERSION 74 · UPDATED 20 Author Information Ronald O'Rourke Specialist in Naval Affairs Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 		2020-05-07T15:54:02-0400
CRS Legal Sidebar Prepared for Members and Committees of Congress Legal Sidebari Executive Order on the Food Supply Chain and the Defense Production Act: FAQs May 1, 2020 On April 28, 2020, President Trump issued an executive order (EO) invoking the Defense Production Act (DPA) to address the food supply chain for meat and poultry products during the national emergency caused by the COVID-19 outbreak. The release of the EO was preceded by some state and congressional calls for such an order, and significant media coverage about the potential contents of such an order. This Sidebar addresses some frequently asked questions about the EO’s contents, legal bases, and potential effects. What does the EO do and how does it use the DPA? The EO designates “meat and poultry in the food supply chain” as “critical and strategic materials” under section 101(b) of the DPA. This section of the DPA permits the President to control distribution of designated materials in the civilian market, if: (1) the material is determined to be essential to the national defense, and (2) that the requirements of the national defense cannot be met through other means “without creating a significant dislocation of the normal distribution” of the designated material “to such a degree as to create appreciable hardship.” Having made such a finding, the EO authorizes the Secretary of Agriculture to “take all appropriate action under [section 101(b)] to ensure that meat and poultry processors continue operations consistent with the guidance for their operations jointly issued by the [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)] and [the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)].” Based on a plain reading of the text, the EO itself does not order any plants to remain open. Rather, it permits the Secretary to issue regulations, orders, or take other actions to address continued operation of processors, while also ensuring that processors adhere to the CDC/OSHA guidance. The EO further authorizes the Secretary to “identify additional specific food supply chain resources” as “critical and strategic materials” under the DPA. Based on this authorization, the Secretary could conceivably extend the reach of the EO beyond meat and poultry to any other commodity or resource within a food supply chain, provided these commodities or resources satisfy the requirements of section 101(b). Finally, the EO provides additional authority under section 101(a) of the DPA to allow the Secretary to prioritize contracts or “allocate materials, services, and facilities as deemed necessary or appropriate to Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov LSB10456 https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/executive-order-delegating-authority-dpa-respect-food-supply-chain-resources-national-emergency-caused-outbreak-covid-19/https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R43767https://www.foodsafetynews.com/2020/04/updated-executive-order-to-meat-industry-no-more-closures/https://www.rounds.senate.gov/newsroom/press-releases/rounds-urges-administration-to-take-additional-steps-to-address-food-production-crisishttps://www.irishtimes.com/news/world/us/trump-to-sign-executive-order-requiring-meat-plants-to-stay-open-1.4240380https://www.businessinsider.com/trump-executive-order-for-meat-plants-to-stay-open-coronavirus-2020-4https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-trump-order/trump-to-order-u-s-meat-processing-plants-to-stay-open-administration-official-idUSKCN22A2W8https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title50-section4511&num=0&edition=prelimhttps://www.osha.gov/Publications/OSHA3990.pdfhttps://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title50-section4511&num=0&edition=prelimCongressional Research Service 2 promote the national defense.” To implement this part of the EO, the President has also delegated authority to the Secretary to, among other things, issue regulations and orders, require information or records from any person, and seek to enforce DPA orders (discussed in more detail below). The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) currently has regulations, known as the Agriculture Priorities and Allocations System (APAS), in place to set out how it will implement section 101 during emergencies and non-emergencies, as directed by President Obama’s Executive Order 13603. President Trump’s new EO seeks to ensure that USDA may create new or amended regulations if USDA believes it necessary to address the COVID-19 emergency (i.e., USDA may rely on existing regulations, but could also issue new or amended regulations). How does an agency implement a DPA EO? There is not necessarily a standard way of implementing an EO implicating the DPA, as much depends on the contents of any EO and the fact that agencies have discretion to issue regulations and orders within the scope of their authority, as they believe appropriate. That said, USDA appears, at least initially, to be attempting to implement the EO via negotiation as opposed to more coercive measures (e.g., orders directed to specific processors or regions). On April 29, 2020, USDA issued a statement that it intends to first “work with meat processing [plants] to affirm they will operate in accordance with the CDC and OSHA Guidance, and then work with state and local officials to ensure that these plants are allowed to operate.” Are there penalties for processors that fail to comply with DPA orders? The DPA empowers the President and agencies to enforce DPA orders in several ways. First, they may seek injunctions or restraining orders in federal court to require an entity to do or refrain from doing something in violation of a DPA order. Second, they may promulgate regulations imposing liability on non-compliant parties. These regulations may incorporate the statutory penalties set out in section 103 of the DPA, which states that “any person who willfully” violates the statutory or regulatory provisions involving Title I of the DPA (i.e., allocation or prioritization of contracts and orders against hoarding supplies) may be fined up to $10,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both. USDA currently has regulations addressing compliance under its APAS program. If USDA chooses to rely on these regulations to implement the prioritization and allocation of orders under the current EO, it could also seek to rely on the penalty components of these provisions if processors refuse to comply with DPA orders. Does the EO or DPA limit the legal liability of processors? The EO contains no reference to legal liability or immunity from lawsuits for affected processors and, on its own, does not grant immunity to processors. However, the DPA contains a provision that provides parties subject to DPA orders with a defense against liability, which applies regardless of whether an EO expressly references it. Section 707 of the DPA states as follows: No person shall be held liable for damages or penalties for any act or failure to act resulting directly or indirectly from compliance with a rule, regulation, or order issued pursuant to this chapter, notwithstanding that any such rule, regulation, or order shall thereafter be declared by judicial or other competent authority to be invalid. As an initial matter, this provision is not a blanket grant of immunity from liability for all actions that an entity may take under a DPA order. Rather, the act (or failure to act) in question must “result[] directly or indirectly from compliance” with an EO or other rule, regulation, or order issued by an agency. Thus, while an entity may raise a DPA order as a defense if sued for actions taken while complying with that https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title50-section4554&num=0&edition=prelimhttps://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title50-section4555&num=0&edition=prelimhttps://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title50-section4555&num=0&edition=prelimhttps://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title50-section4556&num=0&edition=prelimhttps://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=038ca19a27c11f8f2f4a6f7540a51d3b&mc=true&node=sp7.7.789.d&rgn=div6https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=038ca19a27c11f8f2f4a6f7540a51d3b&mc=true&node=sp7.7.789.d&rgn=div6https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/2012/03/16/executive-order-national-defense-resources-preparednesshttps://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title50-section4554&num=0&edition=prelimhttps://www.usda.gov/media/press-releases/2020/04/28/usda-implement-president-trumps-executive-order-meat-and-poultryhttps://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title50-section4556&num=0&edition=prelimhttps://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title50-section4554&num=0&edition=prelimhttps://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title50-section4556&num=0&edition=prelimhttps://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title50-section4513&num=0&edition=prelimhttps://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=15d711b311151f843b265af8d2b8d675&mc=true&node=sp7.7.789.g&rgn=div6https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title50-section4557&num=0&edition=prelimCongressional Research Service 3 order, whether that entity will ultimately be granted immunity by a court is a fact-specific inquiry. This is evident from a case in which a federal court of appeals rejected a company’s argument that it was immune from liability for toxic waste cleanup costs because it was producing Agent Orange under a DPA order for the federal government. Moreover, whether section 707 extends beyond breach of contract situations to tort law (e.g., negligence or product defect claims) remains debated and under-litigated. On its face, section 707 does not differentiate between contract and tort law, which may indicate it could apply to both types of disputes provided the act in question resulted “directly or indirectly” from compliance with a DPA order. As one federal district court has noted, Congress originally designed section 707 to apply only to contract issues, but Congress later removed the section’s express reference to contractual liability. Given this legislative history, it may be that Congress intended that entities subject to DPA orders could raise section 707 as a defense in both contract and tort litigation. But, as that same district court pointed out, it may be “unlikely that Congress would work such a major change in tort law without being explicit about it.” In sum, the precise scope and applicability of section 707 is unclear for at least two reasons: (1) it is undecided whether and how far it extends beyond contract disputes to tort litigation, and (2) whether an action in dispute results “directly or indirectly” from compliance with a DPA order is fact-specific and must be determined on a case-by-case basis. Does OSHA’s enforcement policy limit legal liability for processors? OSHA’s interim enforcement response plan, as clarified by a statement of enforcement policy, does not affect processors’ legal obligations. The response plan and enforcement policy are mechanisms used to set out broadly OSHA’s enforcement priorities and indicate how it will exercise its enforcement discretion. Thus, although OSHA indicates that it “does not anticipate citing employers that adhere to” the CDC/OSHA guidance for operations, this is not a guarantee of non-enforcement or immunity. Potentially to address processor concerns about legal liability resulting from continuing operations, OSHA has indicated a willingness to entertain requests from processors that are sued for alleged workplace exposure to COVID-19 to participate in the litigation, provided the processor being sued has “demonstrated good faith attempts to comply” with the CDC/OSHA guidance. However, this is not a promise to participate in litigation. Further, OSHA has extended a similar offer to employees, indicating it may opt to participate on behalf of the employees “if their employer has not taken steps in good faith” to comply with the CDC/OSHA guidance. Author Information <Contact Name> <Position> Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However,https://casetext.com/case/us-v-vertac-chemical-corp-6https://law.justia.com/cases/federal/district-courts/FSupp/597/740/1437287/https://www.osha.gov/memos/2020-04-13/interim-enforcement-response-plan-coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19https://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases/osha/osha20200428-1https://www.osha.gov/Publications/OSHA3990.pdfhttps://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases/osha/osha20200428-1Congressional Research Service 4 LSB10456 · VERSION 1 · NEW as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 		2020-05-01T11:50:21-0400
Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Updated May 1, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov R43838 Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Summary Many observers have concluded that the post-Cold War era of international relations—which began in the early 1990s and is sometimes referred to as the unipolar moment (with the United States as the unipolar power)—began to fade in 2006-2008, and that by 2014, the international environment had shifted to a fundamentally different situation of renewed great power competition with China and Russia and challenges by these two countries and others to elements of the U.S.-led international order that has operated since World War II. The shift to renewed great power competition was acknowledged alongside other considerations in the Obama Administration’s June 2015 National Military Strategy, and was placed at the center of the Trump Administration’s December 2017 National Security Strategy (NSS) and January 2018 National Defense Strategy (NDS). The December 2017 NSS and January 2018 NDS formally reoriented U.S. national security strategy and U.S. defense strategy toward an explicit primary focus on great power competition with China and Russia. Department of Defense (DOD) officials have subsequently identified countering China’s military capabilities as DOD’s top priority. The shift to renewed great power competition has profoundly changed the conversation about U.S. defense issues. Counterterrorist operations and U.S. military operations in the Middle East, which moved to the center of discussions of U.S. defense issues following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, continue to be conducted, but are now a less dominant element in the conversation, and discussions of U.S. defense issues now feature a new or renewed emphasis on the following, all of which relate to China and/or Russia:  grand strategy and the geopolitics of great power competition as a starting point for discussing U.S. defense issues;  organizational changes within DOD;  nuclear weapons and nuclear deterrence;  the global allocation of U.S. military force deployments;  new U.S. military service operational concepts;  U.S. and allied military capabilities in the Indo-Pacific region;  U.S. and NATO military capabilities in Europe;  capabilities for conducting so-called high-end conventional warfare;  maintaining U.S. superiority in conventional weapon technologies;  innovation and speed of U.S. weapon system development and deployment, to help maintain U.S. superiority in fielded weapons;  mobilization capabilities for an extended-length large-scale conflict;  supply chain security, meaning awareness and minimization of reliance in U.S. military systems on foreign components, subcomponents, materials, and software; and  capabilities for countering so-called hybrid warfare and gray-zone tactics. The issue for Congress is how U.S. defense planning should respond to this shift, and whether to approve, reject, or modify the Trump Administration’s proposed defense funding levels, strategy, plans, and programs for responding to this shift. Congress’s decisions on these issues could have significant or even profound implications for U.S. defense capabilities and funding requirements.Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Background ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Shift to Renewed Great Power Competition ............................................................................. 1 Overview of Implications for Defense ...................................................................................... 2 Grand Strategy and Geopolitics of Great Power Competition ............................................ 2 Organizational Changes within DOD ................................................................................. 4 Nuclear Weapons and Nuclear Deterrence ......................................................................... 4 Global Allocation of U.S. Military Force Deployments ..................................................... 5 New Operational Concepts ................................................................................................. 6 U.S. and Allied Capabilities in Indo-Pacific Region .......................................................... 6 U.S. and NATO Capabilities in Europe .............................................................................. 7 Capabilities for High-End Conventional Warfare ............................................................... 8 Maintaining U.S. Superiority in Conventional Weapon Technologies ............................... 9 Innovation and Speed of U.S. Weapon System Development and Deployment ................. 9 Mobilization Capabilities for Extended-Length Conflict .................................................. 11 Supply Chain Security ....................................................................................................... 11 Capabilities for Countering Hybrid Warfare and Gray-Zone Tactics ............................... 13 January 2020 DOD Report on FY2021 Defense-Wide Review .............................................. 13 Issues for Congress ........................................................................................................................ 16 Appendixes Appendix A. Background on Shift to Renewed Great Power Competition .................................. 19 Appendix B. Articles on Shift to Renewed Great Power Competition .......................................... 26 Appendix C. Articles on Grand Strategy and Geopolitics ............................................................. 31 Appendix D. Articles on Russia’s Hybrid Warfare Tactics ........................................................... 37 Appendix E. Congress and the Late 1980s/Early 1990s Shift to Post-Cold War Era .................... 42 Contacts Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 44 Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction This report provides a brief overview of implications for U.S. defense of the shift in the international environment to a situation of renewed great power competition with China and Russia. The issue for Congress is how U.S. defense planning should respond to this shift, and whether to approve, reject, or modify the Trump Administration’s proposed defense funding levels, strategy, plans, and programs for responding to this shift. Congress’s decisions on these issues could have significant or even profound implications for U.S. defense capabilities and funding requirements. This report focuses on defense-related issues and does not discuss potential implications of the shift to renewed great power competition for other policy areas, such as foreign policy and diplomacy, trade and finance, energy, and foreign assistance. A separate CRS report discusses the current debate over the future U.S. role in the world and the implications of this debate for both defense and other policy areas, particularly in light of the shift to renewed great power competition.1 Background Shift to Renewed Great Power Competition Many observers have concluded that the post-Cold War era of international relations—which began in the early 1990s and is sometimes referred to as the unipolar moment (with the United States as the unipolar power)—began to fade in 2006-2008, and that by 2014, the international environment had shifted to a fundamentally different situation of renewed great power competition with China and Russia and challenges by these two countries and others to elements of the U.S.-led international order that has operated since World War II.2 The shift to renewed great power competition was acknowledged alongside other considerations in the Obama Administration’s June 2015 National Military Strategy,3 and was placed at the center of the Trump Administration’s December 2017 National Security Strategy (NSS)4 and January 2018 National Defense Strategy (NDS).5 The December 2017 NSS and January 2018 1 CRS Report R44891, U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke and Michael Moodie. 2 The term international order is generally used to refer to the collection of organizations, institutions, treaties, rules, and norms that are intended to organize, structure, and regulate international relations during a given historical period. Key features of the U.S.-led international order established at the end of World War II—also known as the liberal international order, postwar international order, or open international order, and often referred to as a rules-based order—are generally said to include the following: respect for the territorial integrity of countries, and the unacceptability of changing international borders by force or coercion; a preference for resolving disputes between countries peacefully, without the use or threat of use of force or coercion; strong international institutions; respect for international law and human rights; a preference for free markets and free trade; and the treatment of international waters, international air space, outer space, and (more recently) cyberspace as international commons. For additional discussion, see CRS Report R44891, U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke and Michael Moodie. 3 Department of Defense, The National Military Strategy of the United States of America 2015, The United States Military’s Contribution To National Security, June 2015, pp. i, 1-4. 4 Office of the President, National Security Strategy of the United States of America, December 2017, 55 pp. 5 Department of Defense, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America: Sharpening the American Military’s Competitive Edge, undated but released January 2018, 11 pp. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 2 NDS formally reoriented U.S. national security strategy and U.S. defense strategy toward an explicit primary focus on great power competition with China and Russia. Department of Defense (DOD) officials have subsequently identified countering China’s military capabilities as DOD’s top priority.6 For additional background information and a list of articles on this shift, see Appendix A and Appendix B. Overview of Implications for Defense The shift to renewed great power competition has profoundly changed the conversation about U.S. defense issues. Counterterrorist operations and U.S. military operations in the Middle East, which moved to the center of discussions of U.S. defense issues following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, continue to be conducted, but are now a less dominant element in the conversation, and discussions of U.S. defense issues now feature a new or renewed emphasis on the topics discussed briefly in the section below, all of which relate to China and/or Russia. Grand Strategy and Geopolitics of Great Power Competition Discussions of the shift to renewed great power competition have led to a renewed emphasis on grand strategy7 and the geopolitics8 of great power competition as a starting point for discussing U.S. defense funding levels, strategy, plans, and programs. A November 2, 2015, press report, for example, stated the following: The resurgence of Russia and the continued rise of China have created a new period of great-power rivalry—and a corresponding need for a solid grand strategy, [then-]U.S. Deputy Defense Secretary Robert Work said Monday at the Defense One Summit in Washington, D.C. 6 See, for example, Bill Gertz, “Pentagon: China Threat Increasing,” Washington Times, February 26, 2020; Tom Rogan, “Defense Secretary Mark Esper: It’s China, China, China,” Washington Examiner, August 28, 2019; Melissa Leon and Jennifer Griffin, “Pentagon ‘Very Carefully’ Watching China, It’s ‘No. 1 Priority,’ Defense Secretary Mark Esper Tells Fox News,” Fox News, August 22, 2019; Missy Ryan and Dan Lamothe, “Defense Secretary Wants to Deliver on the Goal of Outpacing China. Can He Do It?” Washington Post, August 6, 2019; Sandra Erwin, “New Pentagon Chief Shanahan Urges Focus on China and ‘Great Power Competition,’” Space News, January 2, 2019; Ryan Browne, “New Acting Secretary of Defense Tells Pentagon ‘to Remember China, China, China,’” CNN, January 2, 2019; Paul McCleary, “Acting SecDef Shanahan’s First Message: ‘China, China, China,’” Breaking Defense, January 2, 2019. For more on China’s military modernization effort, see CRS Report RL33153, China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities—Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke; and CRS Report R44196, The Chinese Military: Overview and Issues for Congress, by Ian E. Rinehart. 7 The term grand strategy generally refers to a country’s overall strategy for securing its interests and making its way in the world, using all the national tools at its disposal, including diplomatic, information, military, and economic tools (sometimes abbreviated in U.S. government parlance as DIME). 8 The term geopolitics is often used as a synonym for international politics or strategy relating to international politics. More specifically, it refers to the influence of basic geographic features on international relations, and to the analysis of international relations from a perspective that places a strong emphasis on the influence of such geographic features. Basic geographic features involved in geopolitical analysis include things such as the relative sizes and locations of countries or land masses; the locations of key resources such as oil or water; geographic barriers such as oceans, deserts, and mountain ranges; and key transportation links such as roads, railways, and waterways. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 3 “The era of everything [i.e., multiple international security challenges] is the era of grand strategy,” Work said, suggesting that the United States must carefully marshal and deploy its great yet limited resources.9 For the United States, grand strategy can be viewed as strategy at a global or interregional level, as opposed to U.S. strategies for individual regions, countries, or issues. From a U.S. perspective on grand strategy and geopolitics, it can be noted that most of the world’s people, resources, and economic activity are located not in the Western Hemisphere, but in the other hemisphere, particularly Eurasia. In response to this basic feature of world geography, U.S. policymakers for the last several decades have chosen to pursue, as a key element of U.S. national strategy, a goal of preventing the emergence of regional hegemons in Eurasia. Although U.S. policymakers do not often state explicitly in public the goal of preventing the emergence of regional hegemons in Eurasia, U.S. military operations in recent decades—both wartime operations and day-to-day operations—appear to have been carried out in no small part in support of this goal. The goal of preventing the emergence of regional hegemons in Eurasia is a major reason why the U.S. military is structured with force elements that enable it to deploy from the United States, cross broad expanses of ocean and air space, and then conduct sustained, large-scale military operations upon arrival in Eurasia or the waters and airspace surrounding Eurasia. Force elements associated with this goal include, among other things, an Air Force with significant numbers of long-range bombers, long-range surveillance aircraft, long-range airlift aircraft, and aerial refueling tankers, and a Navy with significant numbers of aircraft carriers, nuclear-powered attack submarines, large surface combatants, large amphibious ships, and underway replenishment ships.10 The U.S. goal of preventing the emergence of regional hegemons in Eurasia, though long-standing, is not written in stone—it is a policy choice reflecting two judgments: (1) that given the amount of people, resources, and economic activity in Eurasia, a regional hegemon in Eurasia would represent a concentration of power large enough to be able to threaten vital U.S. interests; and (2) that Eurasia is not dependably self-regulating in terms of preventing the emergence of regional hegemons, meaning that the countries of Eurasia cannot be counted on to be able to prevent, though their own actions, the emergence of regional hegemons, and may need assistance from one or more countries outside Eurasia to be able to do this dependably. A renewal of great power competition does not axiomatically require an acceptance of both of these judgments as guideposts for U.S. defense in coming years—one might accept that there has been a renewal of great power competition, but nevertheless conclude that one of these judgments or the other, while perhaps valid in the past, is no longer valid. A conclusion that one of these judgments is no longer valid could lead to a potentially major change in U.S. grand strategy that could lead to large-scale changes in U.S. defense funding levels, strategy, plans, and programs. By the same token, a renewal of great power competition does not by itself suggest that these two judgements—and the consequent U.S. goal of preventing the emergence of regional hegemons in Eurasia—are not valid as guideposts for U.S. defense in coming years. For a list of articles pertaining to the debate over U.S. grand strategy, see Appendix C. 9 Bradley Peniston, “Work: ‘The Age of Everything Is the Era of Grand Strategy’,” Defense One, November 2, 2015. 10 For additional discussion, see CRS In Focus IF10485, Defense Primer: Geography, Strategy, and U.S. Force Design, by Ronald O'Rourke. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 4 Organizational Changes within DOD The renewal of great power competition has led to increased discussion about whether and how to make organizational changes within DOD to better align DOD’s activities with those needed to counter Chinese and Russian military capabilities. Among changes that have been made, among the most prominent have been the creation of the U.S. Space Force and the elevation of the U.S. Cyber Command to be its own combatant command.11 Another example of an area of potential organizational change within DOD is information operations.12 Nuclear Weapons and Nuclear Deterrence The renewal of great power competition has led to a renewed emphasis in discussions of U.S. defense on nuclear weapons and nuclear deterrence. Russia’s reassertion of its status as a major world power has included, among other things, recurring references by Russian officials to Russia’s nuclear weapons capabilities and Russia’s status as a major nuclear weapon power. China’s nuclear-weapon capabilities are much more modest than Russia’s, but China is modernizing its nuclear forces as part of its overall military modernization effort, and some observers believe that China may increase the size of its nuclear force in coming years. The increased emphasis in discussions of U.S. defense and security on nuclear weapons and nuclear deterrence comes at a time when DOD is in the early stages of a multiyear plan to spend scores of billions of dollars to modernize U.S. strategic nuclear deterrent forces.13 DOD, for example, currently has plans to acquire a new class of ballistic missile submarines14 and a next-generation long-range bomber.15 The topic of nuclear weapons in a context of great power competition was a key factor in connection with the U.S. withdrawal from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty.16 The Trump Administration has invited China to be a third participant, along with the United States and Russia, in negotiations on future limitations on nuclear arms,17 but China reportedly has refused to join such negotiations.18 11 See, for example, Marcus Weisgerber, “Nothing’s ‘Irreversible,’ But the Pentagon’s New Bureaucracies Aim to Come Close,” Defense One, February 19, 2020. See also CRS In Focus IF10337, Challenges to the United States in Space, by Stephen M. McCall; CRS In Focus IF10950, Toward the Creation of a U.S. “Space Force”, coordinated by Steven A. Hildreth, CRS In Focus IF11172, “Space Force” and Related DOD Proposals: Issues for Congress, by Kathleen J. McInnis and Stephen M. McCall, and CRS In Focus IF11203, Proposed Civilian Personnel System Supporting “Space Force”, by Alan Ott. 12 For additional discussion regarding information operations, see CRS In Focus IF10771, Defense Primer: Information Operations, by Catherine A. Theohary; CRS Report RL31787, Information Operations, Cyberwarfare, and Cybersecurity: Capabilities and Related Policy Issues, by Catherine A. Theohary; CRS In Focus IF11292, Convergence of Cyberspace Operations and Electronic Warfare, by Catherine A. Theohary and John R. Hoehn; CRS Report R43848, Cyber Operations in DOD Policy and Plans: Issues for Congress, by Catherine A. Theohary; CRS Report R43848, Cyber Operations in DOD Policy and Plans: Issues for Congress, by Catherine A. Theohary. 13 See CRS Report RL33640, U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues, by Amy F. Woolf, and Congressional Budget Office, Projected Costs of U.S. Nuclear Forces, 2015 to 2024, January 2015, 7 pp. 14 CRS Report R41129, Navy Columbia (SSBN-826) Class Ballistic Missile Submarine Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 15 CRS Report RL34406, Air Force Next-Generation Bomber: Background and Issues for Congress, by Jeremiah Gertler. 16 For additional discussion, see CRS Insight IN10985, U.S. Withdrawal from the INF Treaty, by Amy F. Woolf. 17 See, for example, Emma Farge, “U.S. Urges China to Join Nuclear Arms Talks with Russia,” Reuters, January 21, 2020; Michael R. Gordon, “U.S. Invites China for Talks on Nuclear Arms,” Wall Street Journal, December 20, 2019; David Wainter, “Chinese Nuclear Stockpile Clouds Prospects for U.S.-Russia Deal,” Bloomberg, October 18, 2019. 18 See, for example, Ben Blanchard, “China Says It Won’t Take Part in Trilateral Nuclear Arms Talks,” Reuters, May Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 5 Global Allocation of U.S. Military Force Deployments The renewal of great power competition has led to increased discussion about whether and how to change the global allocation of U.S. military force deployments so as to place more emphasis on deployments for countering Chinese and Russian military capabilities, and less emphasis on deployments that serve other purposes. The Obama Administration, as part of an initiative it referred to as strategic rebalancing or the strategic pivot, sought to reduce U.S. force deployments in Iraq and Afghanistan, in part to help facilitate an increase in U.S. force deployments to the Asia-Pacific region for countering China.19 More recently, President Trump has expressed a desire to reduce U.S. military deployments to the Middle East, and Trump Administration officials have stated that the Administration is considering reducing U.S. military deployments to the Africa and South America, in part to help facilitate an increase in U.S. force deployments to the Indo-Pacific region for countering China.20 Developments in the Middle East affecting U.S. interests are viewed as complicating plans or desires that U.S. leaders might have for reducing U.S. force deployments to that region.21 The Trump Administration’s proposals for reducing force deployments to Africa and South America have become a subject of debate, in part because they are viewed by some observers as creating a risk of leading to increased Chinese or Russian influence in those regions.22 Although it is not yet 6, 2019; Ben Westcott, “China ‘Will Not Participate’ in Trump’s Proposed Three-Way Nuclear Talks, CNN, May 6, 2019; Samuel Osborne, “China Refuses to Join Nuclear Talks with US and Russia in Blow for Trump,” Independent (UK), May 7, 2019; Steven Pifer, “Trump’s Bid to Go Big on Nuclear Arms Looks Like a Fizzle,” Defense One, February 5, 2020; Cheng Hanping, “US Attempt to Rope China into New START Negotiations Won’t Succeed,” Global Times, February 12, 2020; Hal Brands, “China Has No Reason to Make a Deal on Nuclear Weapons,” Bloomberg, April 29, 2020; Robbie Gramer and Jack Detsch, “Trump Fixates on China as Nuclear Arms Pact Nears Expiration,” Foreign Policy, April 29, 2020. 19 For more on the Obama Administration’s strategic rebalancing initiative, which included political and economic dimensions as well as planned military force redeployments, see CRS Report R42448, Pivot to the Pacific? The Obama Administration’s “Rebalancing” Toward Asia, coordinated by Mark E. Manyin, and CRS In Focus IF10029, China, U.S. Leadership, and Geopolitical Challenges in Asia, by Susan V. Lawrence. 20 See, for example, Glen Carey, “U.S. Pentagon Chief Wants to Reallocate Forces to Indo-Pacific,” Bloomberg, December 7, 2019; Shawn Snow, “Esper Wants to Move Troops from Afghanistan to the Indo-Pacific to Confront China,” Military Times, December 18, 2019; Helene Cooper, Thomas Gibbons-Neff, and Eric Schmitt, “Pentagon Eyes Africa Drawdown as First Step in Global Troop Shift,” New York Times, December 24, 2019, Robert Burns, “Pentagon Sees Taliban Deal as Allowing Fuller Focus on China,” Associated Press, March 1, 2020. See also Kyle Rempfer, “Soldiers Will Spend Longer Deployments in Asia,” Army Times, February 20, 2020; Mike Sweeney, “Considering the ‘Zero Option,’ Cold War Lessons on U.S. Basing in the Middle East,” Defense Priorities, March 2020. 21 See, for example, Adam Taylor, “Why U.S. Presidents Find It So Hard to Withdraw Troops from the Mideast,” Washington Post, October 22, 2019; Yaroslav Trofimov, “America Can’t Escape the Middle East,” Wall Street Journal, October 25, 2019; Hal Brands, “Why America Can't Quit The Middle East,” Hoover Institution, March 21, 2019; Connor O’Brien and Jacqueline Feldscher, “The Pentagon Wants Money for China, But Troops Are Stuck in the Sand,” Politico Pro, February 4, 2020; Alia Awadallah, “How to Get the National Defense Strategy Out of Its Mideast Rut,” Defense One, February 7, 2020. 22 See, for example, Seth Cropsey and Gary Roughead, “A U.S. Withdrawal Will Cause a Power Struggle in the Middle East,” Foreign Policy, December 17, 2019; Diana Stancy Correll, “Lawmakers Voice Concern About a Potential troop Reduction in Africa,” Military Times, January 14, 2020; Joe Gould, “Esper’s Africa Drawdown Snags on Capitol Hill,” Defense News, January 16, 2020; Ellen Mitchell, “Lawmakers Push Back at Pentagon’s Possible Africa Drawdown,” The Hill, January 19, 2020; K. Riva Levinson, “Broad, Bipartisan Rebuke for Proposal to Pull Troops from Africa,” The Hill, January 21, 2020; Carley Petesch (Associated Press), “Allies Worry as US Ponders Cutting Military Forces in Africa,” Military Times, January 29, 2020; Lara Seligman and Robbie Gramer, “Pentagon Debates Drawdown in Africa, South America,” Foreign Policy, January 30, 2020; “Jacqueline Feldscher, “Esper Says Troop Presence in Africa, South America Could Grow,” Politico Pro, January 30, 2020; Joe Gould, “Expect Congress to Block Africa Troop Cuts, Says Defense Panel Chairman,” Defense News, February 27, 2020; Eric Schmitt, “Terrorism Threat in West Africa Soars as U.S. Weighs Troop Cuts,” New York Times, February 27, 2020; Matthew Dalton, “The US Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 6 clear in what ways or to what degree there will be a global reallocation of U.S. military force deployments, the discussion of the potential benefits and risks of such a reallocation is now substantially influenced by the renewal of great power competition. New Operational Concepts The renewal of great power competition has led to a new focus by U.S. military services on the development of new operational concepts—that is, new ways of employing U.S. military forces—particularly for countering improving Chinese anti-access/area-denial (A2/AD) military forces in the Indo-Pacific region, an area that has been defined as extending from the west coast of the United States to the west cost of India (aka “Hollywood to Bollywood”). These new operational concepts include Multi-Domain Operations (MDO) for the Army and Air Force, Agile Combat Employment for the Air Force, Distributed Maritime Operations (DMO) for the Navy and Marine Corps, and Littoral Operations in a Contested Environment (LOCE) and Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations (EABO) for the Marine Corps. These new operational concepts focus on more fully integrating U.S. military capabilities across multiple domains (i.e., land, air sea, space, electromagnetic, information, and cyberspace), employing U.S. military forces that are less concentrated and more distributed in their architectures, making greater use of networking technologies to tie those distributed forces together into integrated battle networks, and making greater use of unmanned vehicles as part of the overall force architecture.23 U.S. and Allied Capabilities in Indo-Pacific Region The emergence of great power competition with China has led to a major U.S. defense-planning focus on strengthening U.S. military capabilities in the Indo-Pacific region. The discussion in the December 2017 NSS of regions of interest to the United States begins with a section on the Indo-Pacific,24 and the unclassified summary of the January 2018 NDS mentions the Indo-Pacific at several points.25 Strengthening U.S. military capabilities in the Indo-Pacific is a key component of the Free and Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP), the Trump Administration’s overarching policy construct for that region.26 Should Send More, Not Fewer, Troops to West Africa,” Defense One, March 3, 2020; Robbie Gramer, “U.S. Congress Moves to Restrain Pentagon Over Africa Drawdown Plans,” Foreign Policy, March 4, 2020; Sam Wilkins, “Does America Need an Africa Strategy?” War on the Rocks, April 2, 2020. 23 For more on EABO and DMO, see CRS Report RL32665, Navy Force Structure and Shipbuilding Plans: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 24 Office of the President, National Security Strategy of the United States of America, December 2017, pp. 45-47. 25 Department of Defense, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America: Sharpening the American Military’s Competitive Edge, undated but released January 2018, pp. 2, 4, 6, 9. See also Eric Sayers, “15 Big Ideas to Operationalize America’s Indo-Pacific Strategy,” War on the Rocks, April 6, 2018; Lindsey Ford, “Promise vs. Experience: How to Fix the ‘Free & Open Indo-Pacific,” War on the Rocks, April 10, 2018. 26 For more on the Indo-Pacific region, see CRS Insight IN10888, Australia, China, and the Indo-Pacific, by Bruce Vaughn; CRS In Focus IF10726, China-India Rivalry in the Indian Ocean, by Bruce Vaughn; and CRS In Focus IF10199, U.S.-Japan Relations, coordinated by Emma Chanlett-Avery. The FOIP concept is still being fleshed out by the Trump Administration; see, White House, “President Donald J. Trump’s Administration is Advancing a Free and Open Indo-Pacific,” July 20, 2018, accessed August 21, 2018, at https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/president-donald-j-trumps-administration-advancing-free-open-indo-pacific/; Department of State, “Advancing a Free and Open Indo-Pacific,” July 30, 2018, accessed August 21, 2018, at https://www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2018/07/284829.htm; Department of State, “Briefing on The Indo-Pacific Strategy,” April 2, 2018, accessed August 21, 2018, at https://www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2018/04/280134.htm; U.S. Department of State, “Remarks on ‘America’s Indo-Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 7 As one service-oriented example of DOD actions to strengthen U.S. military capabilities in the Indo-Pacific, the Navy has shifted a greater part of its fleet to the region; is assigning its most capable ships, aircraft, and personnel to the region; is conducting increased operations, exercises, and warfighting experiments in the region; and is developing new weapons, unmanned vehicles, and other technologies that can be viewed as being aimed primarily at potential future operations in the region.27 DOD activities in the Indo-Pacific region include those for competing strategically with China in the South and East China Seas.28 They also include numerous activities to help strengthen the military capabilities of U.S. allies in the region, particularly Japan and Australia, as well as South Korea, the Philippines, and New Zealand, as well as activities to improve the ability of forces from these countries to operate effectively with U.S. forces (referred to as military interoperability) and activities to improve the military capabilities of emerging security partners in the region, such as Vietnam. As noted earlier, DOD officials have stated that strengthening U.S. military force deployments in the Indo-Pacific region could involve reducing U.S. force deployments to other locations. In April 2020, it was reported that Admiral Philip (Phil) Davidson, Commander of U.S. Indo-Pacific Command (INDOPACOM), has submitted to Congress a $20.1 billion plan for investments for improving U.S. military capabilities in the Indo-Pacific region. Davidson submitted the plan, entitled Regain the Advantage, in response to Section 1253 of the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (S. 1790/P.L. 116-92 of December 20, 2020), which required the Commander of INDOPACOM to submit to the congressional defense committees a report providing the Commander’s independent assessment of the activities and resources required, for FY2022-FY2026, to implement the National Defense Strategy with respect to the Indo-Pacific region, maintain or restore the comparative U.S. military advantage relative to China, and reduce the risk associated with executing DOD contingency plans. Davidson’s plan requests about $1.6 billion in additional funding suggestions for FY2021 above what the Pentagon is requesting in its proposed FY2021 budget, and about $18.5 billion in investments for FY2022-FY2026.29 U.S. and NATO Capabilities in Europe The renewal of great power competition with Russia, which was underscored by Russia’s seizure and annexation of Ukraine in March 2014 and Russia’s subsequent actions in eastern Ukraine, has led to a renewed focus in U.S. defense planning on strengthening U.S. and NATO military capabilities in Europe.30 Some observers have expressed particular concern about the ability of Pacific Economic Vision,’” remarks by Secretary of State Michael R. Pompeo, Indo-Pacific Business Forum, U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Washington, DC, July 30, 2018. 27 For additional discussion, see CRS Report RL33153, China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities—Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 28 For more on this competition, see CRS Report R42784, U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 29 See Aaron Mehta, “Inside US Indo-Pacific Command’s $20 Billion Wish List to Deter China—and Why Congress May Approve,” Defense News, April 2, 2020; Paul McLeary, “EXCLUSIVE Indo-Pacom Chief’s Bold $20 Billion Plan For Pacific; What Will Hill Do?” Breaking Defense, April 2, 2020. The unclassified executive summary of the Section 1253 report was accessed on April 7, 2020, at https://int.nyt.com/data/documenthelper/6864-national-defense-strategy-summ/8851517f5e10106bc3b1/optimized/full.pdf. 30 See, for example, CRS In Focus IF11130, United States European Command: Overview and Key Issues, by Kathleen J. McInnis. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 8 the United States and its NATO allies to defend the Baltic members of NATO in the event of a fast-paced Russian military move into one or more of those countries. As a result of this renewed focus, the United States has taken a number of steps in recent years to strengthen the U.S. military presence and U.S. military operations in and around Europe. In mainland Europe, this has included steps to reinforce Army and Air Force capabilities and operations in central Europe, including actions to increase the U.S. military presence in countries such as Poland.31 In northern Europe, U.S. actions have included presence operations and exercises by the Marine Corps in Norway and by the U.S. Navy in northern European waters. In southern Europe, the Mediterranean has re-emerged as an operating area of importance for the Navy. Some of these actions, particularly for mainland Europe, are assembled into an annually funded package within the overall DOD budget originally called the European Reassurance Initiative and now called the European Deterrence Initiative.32 Renewed concern over NATO capabilities for deterring potential Russian aggression in Europe has been a key factor in U.S. actions intended to encourage the NATO allies to increase their own defense spending levels. NATO leaders since 2014 have announced a series of initiatives for increasing their defense spending and refocusing NATO away from “out of area” (i.e., beyond-Europe) operations, and back toward a focus on territorial defense and deterrence in Europe itself.33 Capabilities for High-End Conventional Warfare The renewal of great power competition has led to a renewed emphasis in U.S. defense planning on capabilities for conducting so-called high-end conventional warfare, meaning large-scale, high-intensity, technologically sophisticated conventional warfare against adversaries with similarly sophisticated military capabilities. Many DOD acquisition programs, exercises, and warfighting experiments have been initiated, accelerated, increased in scope, given higher priority, or had their continuation justified as a consequence of the renewed U.S. emphasis on high-end warfare. Weapon acquisition programs that can be linked to preparing for high-end warfare include (to mention only a few examples) those for procuring advanced aircraft such as the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF)34 and the next-generation long-range bomber,35 highly capable warships such as the Virginia-class attack submarine36 and DDG-51 class Aegis destroyer,37 ballistic missile defense (BMD) capabilities,38 longer-ranged land-attack and anti-ship weapons, new types of weapons 31 See, for example, CRS In Focus IF11280, U.S. Military Presence in Poland, by Andrew Feickert, Kathleen J. McInnis, and Derek E. Mix. 32 For further discussion, see CRS In Focus IF10946, The European Deterrence Initiative: A Budgetary Overview, by Pat Towell and Aras D. Kazlauskas. 33 For additional discussion, see CRS Report R45652, Assessing NATO’s Value, by Paul Belkin. See also CRS Insight IN10926, NATO’s 2018 Brussels Summit, by Paul Belkin. 34 For more on the F-35 program, see CRS Report RL30563, F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program, by Jeremiah Gertler. 35 CRS Report RL34406, Air Force Next-Generation Bomber: Background and Issues for Congress, by Jeremiah Gertler. 36 For more on the Virginia-class program, see CRS Report RL32418, Navy Virginia (SSN-774) Class Attack Submarine Procurement: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 37 For more on the DDG-51 program, see, Navy DDG-51and DDG-1000 Destroyer Programs: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O’Rourke. 38 See, for example, CRS Report R43116, Ballistic Missile Defense in the Asia-Pacific Region: Cooperation and Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 9 such as lasers, railguns, and hypervelocity projectiles,39 new ISR (intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance) capabilities, military space capabilities,40 electronic warfare capabilities, military cyber capabilities, hypersonic weapons, and the military uses of robotics and autonomous unmanned vehicles, quantum technology, and artificial intelligence (AI).41 Maintaining U.S. Superiority in Conventional Weapon Technologies As part of the renewed emphasis on capabilities for high-end conventional warfare, DOD officials have expressed concern that U.S. superiority in conventional weapon technologies has narrowed or in some cases even been eliminated by China and (in certain areas) Russia. In response, DOD has taken a number of actions in recent years that are intended to help maintain or regain U.S. superiority in conventional weapon technologies, including increased research and development funding for new militarily applicable technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), autonomous unmanned weapons, hypersonic weapons, directed-energy weapons, biotechnology, and quantum technology.42 Innovation and Speed of U.S. Weapon System Development and Deployment In addition to the above-mentioned efforts for maintaining U.S. superiority in conventional weapon technologies, DOD is placing new emphasis on innovation and speed in weapon system development and deployment, so as to more quickly and effectively transition new weapon technologies into fielded systems. The 2018 NDS places states Deliver performance at the speed of relevance. Success no longer goes to the country that develops a new technology first, but rather to the one that better integrates it and adapts its way of fighting. Current processes are not responsive to need; the Department is over-optimized for exceptional performance at the expense of providing timely decisions, policies, and capabilities to the warfighter. Our response will be to prioritize speed of delivery, continuous adaptation, and frequent modular upgrades. We must not accept cumbersome approval chains, wasteful applications of resources in uncompetitive space, or overly risk-averse thinking that impedes change. Delivering performance means we will shed outdated management practices and structures while integrating insights from business innovation.43 Opposition, by Ian E. Rinehart, Steven A. Hildreth, and Susan V. Lawrence, and CRS Report RL33745, Navy Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 39 See, for example, CRS Report R44175, Navy Lasers, Railgun, and Gun-Launched Guided Projectile: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 40 See, for example, CRS In Focus IF10337, Challenges to the United States in Space, by Steven A. Hildreth and Clark Groves. 41 See, for example, CRS Report R43848, Cyber Operations in DOD Policy and Plans: Issues for Congress, by Catherine A. Theohary. 42 See, for example, Nathan Strout, “New Pentagon Budget Request Invests in 4 Advanced Technologies,” C4ISRNet, February 10, 2020. See also CRS In Focus IF11105, Defense Primer: Emerging Technologies, by Kelley M. Sayler; CRS Report R45178, Artificial Intelligence and National Security, by Kelley M. Sayler; CRS In Focus IF11150, Defense Primer: U.S. Policy on Lethal Autonomous Weapon Systems, by Kelley M. Sayler; and CRS Report R45811, Hypersonic Weapons: Background and Issues for Congress, by Kelley M. Sayler. See also Joe Gould, “Defense Innovation Experts to Congress: Put Money Where Pentagon’s Mouth Is,” Defense News, February 5, 2020; Paul Scharre and Ainikki Riikonen, “The Defense Department Needs a Real Technology Strategy,” Defense One, April 21, 2020. 43 Department of Defense, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America: Sharpening the American Military’s Competitive Edge, undated but released January 2018, p. 10. See also Larrie D. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 10 DOD officials and other observers argue that to facilitate greater innovation and speed in weapon system development and deployment, U.S. defense acquisition policy and the oversight paradigm for assessing the success of acquisition programs will need to be adjusted to place a greater emphasis on innovation and speed as measures of merit in defense acquisition policy, alongside more traditional measures of merit such as minimizing cost growth, schedule delays, and problems in testing. As a consequence, they argue, defense acquisition policy and the oversight paradigm for assessing the success of acquisition programs should place more emphasis on time as a risk factor and feature more experimentation, risk-taking, and tolerance of failure during development, with a lack of failures in testing potentially being viewed in some cases not as an indication success, but of inadequate innovation or speed of development.44 The individual military services have taken various actions in recent years to increase innovation and speed in their weapon acquisition programs. Some of these actions make use of special acquisition authorities provided by Congress in recent years, including Other Transaction Authority (OTA) and what is known as Section 804 authority.45 On January 23, 2020, DOD released a new defense acquisition framework, called the Adaptive Acquisition Framework, that is intended to substantially accelerate the DOD’s process for developing and fielding new weapons.46 In previewing the new framework in October 2019, DOD described it as “the most transformational acquisition policy change we’ve seen in decades.”47 A January 2020 GAO report on weapon system reliability in defense acquisition, however, states DOD has taken steps to accelerate weapon system development, and decision-making authority has been delegated to the military services. In an environment emphasizing speed, without senior leadership focus on a broader range of key reliability practices, DOD runs Ferreiro, “Outperforming With Doctrine, Not Science,” Defense Acquisition University, November 1, 2018. 44 See, for example, Michèle A. Flournoy and Gabrielle Chefitz, “Breaking the Logjam: How the Pentagon Can Build Trust with Congress,” Defense News, April 1, 2020; Ankit Panda, “Getting Critical Technologies Into Defense Applications,” National Interest, February 1, 2020; Ankit Panda, “Critical Technologies and Great Power Competition,” Diplomat, January 29, 2020; Michael Rubin, “The Simple Reason Why America Could Lose the Next Cold War to Russia or China,” National Interest, January 14, 2020; George Franz and Scott Bachand, “China and Russia Beware: How the Pentagon Can Win the Tech Arms Race,” National Interest, November 29, 2019; Scott Maucione, “Special Report: Failure Is an Option for DoD’s Experimental Agency, But How Much?” Federal News Week, October 30, 2019; Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “Stop Wasting Time So We Can Beat China: DoD R&D Boss, Griffin,” Breaking Defense, August 9, 2018. 45 See, for example, CRS Report R45521, Department of Defense Use of Other Transaction Authority: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress, by Heidi M. Peters; Government Accountability Office, Defense Acquisitions[:] DOD’s Use of Other Transactions for Prototype Projects Has Increased, GAO-20-84, November 2019, 31 pp.; Matt Donovan and Will Roper, “Section 804 Gives the US an Advantage in Great Power Competition with China and Russia,” Defense News, August 7, 2019; Justin Doubleday, “Section 809 Panel Chair Warns Against ‘Abuse’ of Other Transaction Agreements,” Inside Defense, October 3, 2019; Aaron Greg, “Seeking an Edge over Geopolitical Rivals, Pentagon Exploits an Obscure Regulatory Workaround,” Washington Post, October 18, 2019; Scott Maucione, “Special Report: Failure Is an Option for DoD’s Experimental Agency, But How Much?” Federal News Network, October 30, 2019; Colin Clark, “OTA Prototyping Nearly Triples To $3.7B: GAO,” Breaking Defense, November 26, 2019; Eric Lofgren, “Too Many Cooks in the DoD: New Policy May Suppress Rapid Acquisition,” Defense News, January 2, 2020. 46 See, for example, Tony Bertuca, “Pentagon releases New Guidelines to Accelerate Acquisition,” Inside Defense, January 24, 2020. The operation of the framework is set forth in Dod Instruction (DODI) 5000.02, Operation of the Adaptive Acquisition Framework, January 23, 2020, 17 pp. 47 See, for example, Tony Bertuca, “[Ellen] Lord: Pentagon Is ‘On the Brink’ of Acquisition Transformation,” Inside Defense, October 18, 2019. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 11 the risk of delivering less reliable systems than promised to the warfighter and spending more than anticipated on rework and maintenance of major weapon systems.48 Mobilization Capabilities for Extended-Length Conflict The renewal of great power competition has led to an increased emphasis in discussions of U.S. defense on U.S. mobilization capabilities, a term that is often used to refer specifically to preparations for activating U.S. military reserve force personnel and inducting additional people into the armed forces, but is used here more broadly, to refer to various activities, including those relating to the ability of the industrial base to support U.S. military operations in a larger-scale, extended-length conflict against China or Russia. Broadly defined, mobilization capabilities include but are not limited to those inducting and training additional military personnel to expand the size of the force or replace personnel who are killed or wounded; for producing new weapons to replace those expended in the earlier stages of a conflict; for repairing battle damage to ships, aircraft, and vehicles; for replacing satellites or other support assets that are lost in combat; and for manufacturing spare parts and consumable items. Some observers have expressed concern about the adequacy of U.S. mobilization capabilities, particularly since this was not a major defense-planning concern during the 20 to 25 years of the post-Cold War era.49 On April 24, 2019, the National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service, a commission created by the FY2017 National Defense Authorization Act (S. 2943/P.L. 114-328 of December 23, 2016),50 held two hearings on U.S. mobilization needs and how to meet them.51 DOD officials are now focusing more on actions to improve U.S. mobilization capabilities.52 Supply Chain Security The shift to renewed great power competition, combined with the globalization of supply chains for many manufactured items, has led to an increased emphasis in U.S. defense planning on supply chain security, meaning (in this context) awareness and minimization of reliance in U.S. 48 Government Accountability Office, Defense Acquisitions[:] Senior Leaders Should Emphasize Key Practices to Improve Weapon System Reliability, GAO-20-151, January 2020, summary page. 49 See, for example, David Barno and Nora Bensahel, “Preparing for the next Big War,” War on the Rocks, January 26, 2016; Robert Haddick, “Competitive Mobilization: How Would We Fare Against China?” War on the Rocks, March 15, 2016; David Barno and Nora Bensahel, “Mirages of War: Six Illusions from Our Recent Conflicts,” War on the Rocks, April 11, 2017; Mark Cancian, “Long Wars and Industrial Mobilization,” War on the Rocks, August 8, 2017; Joseph Whitlock, “The Army’s Mobilization Problem,” U.S. Army War College War Room, October 13, 2017; Alan L. Gropman, “America Needs to Prepare for a Great Power War,” National Interest, February 7, 2018; Elsa B. Kania and Emma Moore, “The US Is Unprepared to Mobilize for Great Power Conflict,” Defense One, July 21, 2019. See also William Greenwalt, Leveraging the National Technology Industrial Base to Address Great-Power Competition: The Imperative to Integrate Industrial Capabilities of Close Allies, Atlantic Council, April 2019, 58 pp. 50 See Sections 551 through 557 of S. 2943/P.L. 114-328. 51 The commission’s web pages for the two hearings, which include links to the prepared statements of the witnesses and additional statements submitted by other parties, are at https://inspire2serve.gov/hearings/selective-service-hearing-future-mobilization-needs-nation (hearing from 9 am to 12 noon) and https://inspire2serve.gov/hearings/selective-service-hearing-how-meet-potential-national-mobilization-needs (hearing from 1 pm to 4 pm). 52 See, for example, Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “WW II On Speed: Joint Staff Fears Long War,” Breaking Defense, January 11, 2017; Department of Defense, Assessing and Strengthening the Manufacturing and Defense Industrial Base and Supply Chain Resiliency of the United States, September 2018, 140 pp.; Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Mobilization Planning, Joint Publication 4-05, 137 pp., October 23, 2018; Memorandum from Michael D. Griffin, Under Secretary of Defense, Research and Engineering, for Chairman, Defense Science Board, Subject: Terms of Reference—Defense Science Board Task Force on 21st Century Industrial Base for National Defense, October 30, 2019. See also CRS In Focus IF11311, Defense Primer: The National Technology and Industrial Base, by Heidi M. Peters. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 12 military systems on components, subcomponents, materials, and software from other countries, particularly China and Russia. An early example concerned the Russian-made RD-180 rocket engine, which was incorporated into certain U.S. space launch rockets, including rockets used by DOD to put military payloads into orbit.53 More recent examples include the dependence of various U.S. military systems on rare earth elements from China, Chinese-made electronic components, software that may contain Chinese- or Russian-origin elements, DOD purchases of Chinese-made drones, and the use of Chinese-made surveillance cameras at U.S. military installations. A November 5, 2019, press report, for example, states The US navy secretary has warned that the “fragile” American supply chain for military warships means the Pentagon is at risk of having to rely on adversaries such as Russia and China for critical components. Richard Spencer, [who was then] the US navy’s top civilian, told the Financial Times he had ordered a review this year that found many contractors were reliant on single suppliers for certain high-tech and high-precision parts, increasing the likelihood they would have to be procured from geostrategic rivals. Mr Spencer said the US was engaged in “great power competition” with other global rivals and that several of them—“primarily Russia and China”—were “all of a sudden in your supply chain, [which is] not to the best interests of what you’re doing” through military procurement.54 In response to concerns like those above, DOD officials have begun to focus more on actions to improve supply chain security.55 53 See CRS Report R44498, National Security Space Launch at a Crossroads, by Steven A. Hildreth. 54 Peter Spiegel and Andrew Edgecliffe-Johnson, “Us Navy Secretary Warns of ‘Fragile’ Supply Chain,” Financial Times, November 5, 2019. Material in brackets as in original. 55 For executive branch documents and documents produced for the executive branch, see, for example, Jon Boyens et al., Supply Chain Risk Management Practices for Federal Information Systems and Organizations, National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST Special Publication 800-161, April 2015, 282 pp.; Defense Science Board, [Report of] Task on Cyber Supply Chain, February 2017, 69 pp.; National Defense Industrial Association, Implementing Cybersecurity in DoD Supply Chains, White Paper, July 2018, 17 pp.; Chris Nissen et al., Deliver Uncompromised, A Strategy for Supply Chain Security and Resilience in Response to the Changing Character of War, MITRE Corporation, August 2018, 55 pp.; Department of Defense, Inspector General, Air Force Space Command Supply Chain Risk Management of Strategic Capabilities, DODIG-2018-143, August 13, 2018, 36 pp.; Department of Defense, Assessing and Strengthening the Manufacturing and Defense Industrial Base and Supply Chain Resiliency of the United States, September 2018, 140 pp.; Defense Logistics Agency, Supply Chain Security Strategy, Strengthening Operational Resiliency, Appendix 1 to DLA’s 2018-2026 Strategic Plan, undated (although the main part of DLA’s strategic plan, as amended, is dated April 2019), 9 pp.; Memorandum from Michael D. Griffin, Under Secretary of Defense, Research and Engineering, for Chairman, Defense Science Board, Subject: Terms of Reference—Defense Science Board Task Force on 21st Century Industrial Base for National Defense, October 30, 2019. GAO has issued several reports over the years addressing supply chain issues, including supply chain security. Examples include the following: Government Accountability Office, Defense Supplier Base[:] Challenges and Policy Considerations Regarding Offshoring and Foreign Investment Risks, GAO-19-516, September 2019, 41 pp.; Government Accountability Office, Nuclear Supply Chain: NNSA Should Notify Congress of Its Recommendations to Improve the Enhanced Procurement Authority, GAO-19-606R, August 8, 2019, 11 pp.; Government Accountability Office, Nuclear Supply Chain: DOE Has Not Used Its Enhanced Procurement Authority but Is Assessing Potential Use, GAO-18-572R, August 2, 2018, 8 pp.; Government Accountability Office, Information Security[:] Supply Chain Risks Affecting Federal Agencies, Testimony before the Subcommittees on Counterterrorism and Intelligence, and Oversight and Management Efficiency, Committee on Homeland Security, House of Representatives, Statement of Gregory C. Wilshusen Director, Information Security Issues, GAO-18-667T, July 12, 2018, 12 pp.; Government Accountability Office, Nuclear Supply Chain[:] DOE Should Assess Circumstances for Using Enhanced Procurement Authority to Manage Risk, GAO-16-710, August 2016, 18 pp.; Government Accountability Office, Rare Earth Materials[:] Developing a Comprehensive Approach Could Help DOD Better Manage National Security Risks in the Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 13 Capabilities for Countering Hybrid Warfare and Gray-Zone Tactics Russia’s seizure and annexation of Crimea in 2014, as well as subsequent Russian actions in eastern Ukraine and elsewhere in Eastern Europe and Russia’s information operations, have led to a focus among policymakers on how to counter Russia’s so-called hybrid warfare or ambiguous warfare tactics. China’s actions in the South and East China Seas have similarly prompted a focus among policymakers on how to counter China’s so-called salami-slicing or gray-zone tactics in those areas.56 For a list of articles discussing this issue, see Appendix D.57 January 2020 DOD Report on FY2021 Defense-Wide Review In early February 2020, DOD released a report, dated January 2020, on the results of the Defense-Wide Review (DWR), a review DOD conducted of certain defense-wide DOD organizations and activities, with the goal of identifying resources that could be redirected to higher-priority DOD programs, particularly those for countering Chinese and Russian military capabilities. The DWR, the report states, was a major DoD initiative personally led by the Secretary of Defense, to improve alignment of time, money, and people to NDS priorities. In total, the Secretary of Defense, and/or the Deputy Secretary of Defense, hosted 21 review sessions examining $99 billion of appropriated resources across roughly 50 Defense-Wide (DW) organizations and activities. Similar to the “Night Court” review process Secretary Esper led during his time as Secretary of the Army, the DWR was a comprehensive examination of DoD organizations Supply Chain, GAO-16-161, February 2016, 34 pp.; Government Accountability Office, Telecommunications Networks[:] Addressing Potential Security Risks of Foreign-Manufactured Equipment, Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Communications and Technology, Committee on Energy and Commerce, House of Representatives, Statement of Mark L. Goldstein, Director Physical Infrastructure Issues, May 21, 2013, 49 pp.; Government Accountability Office, IT Supply Chain[:] Additional Efforts Needed by National Security-Related Agencies to Address Risks, GAO-12-579T, March 27, 2012 (Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Committee on Energy and Commerce, House of Representatives, Statement of Gregory C. Wilshusen, Director Information Security Issues), 10 pp.; Government Accountability Office, IT Supply Chain[:] National Security-Related Agencies Need to Better Address Risks, GAO-12-361, March 2012, 40 pp. For press reports, see Michael Peck, “The U.S. Military’s Greatest Weakness? China ‘Builds’ a Huge Chunk of It,” National Interest, May 26, 2018; Robert Metzger, “Federal Supply-Chain Threats Quietly Growing,” Federal Times, August 13, 2018; Peter Navarro, “America’s Military-Industrial Base Is at Risk,” New York Times, October 4, 2018; Carla Babb and Hong Xie, “US Military Still Buying Chinese-Made Drones Despite Spying Concerns,” VOA News, September 17, 2019; Carla Babb, “US Military Still Buying Chinese-Made Drones Despite Spying Concerns,” VOA News, September 17, 2019; Peter Spiegel and Andrew Edgecliffe-Johnson, “US Navy Secretary Warns of ‘Fragile’ Supply China,” Financial Times, November 5, 2019; Nicole Hong, “A Military Camera Said ‘Made in U.S.A. The Screen Was in Chinese,” New York Times, November 7, 2019; Scott Maucione, “Top DoD Scientist Sets Up Task Forces to Look at Industrial Base, Infrastructure,” Federal News Network, November 25, 2019; Lance Noble, “Defense Drives US Decoupling,” Gavekal Dragonomics, January 13, 2020, 4 pp.; James Kynge and Mercedes Ruehl, “US-China Decoupling Hits Taiwan Chip Giant,” Financial Times, January 15, 2020. For additional discussion, CRS reports discussing aspects of the issue include CRS In Focus IF10920, Cyber Supply Chain Risk Management: An Introduction, by Chris Jaikaran; CRS In Focus IF11226, Defense Primer: Acquiring Specialty Metals, Rare Earth Magnets, and Tungsten, by Heidi M. Peters; CRS In Focus IF11259, Trade Dispute with China and Rare Earth Elements, by Wayne M. Morrison; CRS Report R41347, Rare Earth Elements: The Global Supply Chain, by Marc Humphries; CRS Report R43864, China’s Mineral Industry and U.S. Access to Strategic and Critical Minerals: Issues for Congress, by Marc Humphries; CRS Report R45810, Critical Minerals and U.S. Public Policy, by Marc Humphries; and the section entitled “National Security Concerns” in CRS Report R44544, U.S. Semiconductor Manufacturing: Industry Trends, Global Competition, Federal Policy, by Michaela D. Platzer and John F. Sargent Jr. 56 See CRS Report R42784, U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 57 See also CRS In Focus IF10771, Defense Primer: Information Operations, by Catherine A. Theohary. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 14 outside of the military departments. However, unlike the Army Night Court, the DWR was not a full bottom-up review, as there was insufficient time for a more exhaustive examination to inform the FY 2021 President’s Budget. As such, we will review these agencies more fully in 2020. These reforms required tough decisions. The impacted programs were not wasteful nor mismanaged, they were simply not NDS priorities, some with outdated missions or practices. The question was not “Is this a good program?”, but rather “Is a dollar spent on this program or organization more important to our military capability than spending that same dollar on an NDS priority?”… The FY 2021-2025 DWR successfully generated over $5 billion in FY 2021 savings (5.7% of the Defense-Wide overall budget) for re-investment in lethality and readiness, and identified more than $2 billion in activities and functions to transfer to the military departments. While budget line-item details from DWR savings will be included in the FY 2021 President’s Budget, this report aggregates DW organizations and activities into five functional categories: Family & Benefits; Warfighting & Support; RDT&E; Policy & Oversight; and Working Capital Funds (WCF).… Per the Senate Report accompanying the DoD Appropriations Bill for 2020 and following the FY 2021 budget release, the Department will provide spend plans for all program truncations or eliminations resulting from the DWR…. The DWR identified significant savings in each of the functional categories. The largest savings occurred within the “Warfighting & Support” category due primarily to reductions of legacy missions that do not advance the NDS. The Review also identified savings within the Working Capital Funds (WCF) as well as through transfers of DW activities and functions to the military departments and other agencies, for increased effective and efficient management…. The purpose of generating these DWR savings was to reinvest in NDS priorities. Every dollar spent on overhead, redundant efforts, and lower priority programs is a dollar not spent on lethality and readiness. Without the DWR savings, the full extent of these investments would not have been possible or would have had to been made by realigning resources from existing warfighting capability in the military departments. Key investments made possible by the DWR include: • NUCLEAR MODERNIZATION: Maintaining a strong nuclear deterrent is the highest modernization priority in the NDS. All three legs of the nuclear triad (land, air, and sea) are being modernized simultaneously and DWR savings enabled increased investment in this modernization effort. • SPACE: The FY 2020 NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act] created the sixth Armed Service, the U.S. Space Force (USSF), to transform our ability to fight and win future conflicts. The DWR enabled DoD to fund the establishment of the USSF from within available resources. In addition, the DWR enabled substantial new investments in space capabilities, including resilience of the use of space and enhancements in our ability to control space. • MISSILE DEFENSE: The 2019 Missile Defense Review reiterated U.S. commitment to robust defenses against rogue regime missile threats. DWR savings enable increased missile defense capacity and capability, and allows MDA to pursue a multi-layered approach to homeland missile defense. This approach includes development and deployment of a Next Generation Interceptor (NGI) for Ground-Based Interceptors (GBI) and development and demonstration of lower altitude interceptors that can provide additional defense against threat missiles. • HYPERSONIC WEAPONS: The FY 2020 budget established a significant program of investment in hypersonic weapons. The DWR enabled a major increase in this investment Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 15 to accelerate development and fielding of hypersonic weapons over the Future Years Defense Program (FYDP). • ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI): AI is a key technology for the future and the United States has been trailing our adversaries in investment. The DWR significantly accelerated investment in AI to increase the scope and capability of AI applications fielded across the full range of DoD missions. This investment will support and speed development of applications for maneuver, intelligent business automation and logistics, warfighter health analysis, and intelligence data processing. • 5TH GENERATION (5G) COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGIES: The DWR enabled DoD to resource key investments in secure and resilient 5G technologies and networks and speed their adoption by providing at-scale test facilities for rapid and extensive experimentation and application prototyping. These investments will allow our forces to leverage the dynamic spectrum without impediment across the battlefield as well as establish the foundation for Next Generation technologies through collaboration with industry, academia, and international spectrum access and communications standards organizations. • RESPONSE FORCE READINESS: The new Immediate Response Force (IRF) and Contingency Response Force (CRF) enable the U.S. to rapidly confront incidents and threats to its interests across the globe with mission-ready units from all of the services. DWR savings resource substantial investments to IRF and CRF readiness allowing DoD to fully exercise these capabilities and further advance Dynamic Force Employment…. … to fully implement some of these reforms, we require Congressional support and action, and, in certain cases, tough decisions. Below are some of the key themes of the Legislative Proposals related to DWR reforms for Congress to consider for the FY 2021 NDAA. The FY 2021 President’s Budget, scheduled to be released 10 February 2020, will provide more details. We look forward to working with Congress and our oversight committees to achieve these reforms. Key themes include: • Removing constraints to allow agencies to operate more like private sector businesses, responsibly investing taxpayer resources and achieving funding stability; • Eliminating legacy applications or modernizing technology applications; • Transferring select functions and programs to the military departments; • Eliminating outdated Congressional reporting requirements, ineffective boards/ commissions, and earmarked programs; and • Providing flexibility to capture lost buying power and updating appropriations structures to meet rapid development, sustainment, and development cycles…. The FY 2021 DWR is just the beginning. On 6 January 2020, the Secretary of Defense directed an aggressive and wide-ranging reform agenda for 2020 that includes strengthening DoD oversight of the DW organizations and replicating resource reviews elsewhere in the Department. The Combatant Commands (CCMDs) and military departments are performing line-by-line reviews of their budgets in preparation for the FY 2022 President’s Budget…. The Secretary of Defense also directed a full review of the remaining CCMDs to inform the FY 2022 President’s Budget…. Lastly, the Secretary of Defense directed the Secretaries of the military departments and the Service Chiefs to establish and execute aggressive reform plans—including detailed budget reviews—to free up resources in support of NDS priorities by using the same detailed methodology implemented during the DWR. Military department and Service Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 16 leaders are dedicating necessary time and attention to prioritizing resources within their prescribed fiscal guidance, making tough choices, and relentlessly seeking more cost-effective ways of doing business for the FY 2022 President’s Budget.58 Issues for Congress Potential policy and oversight issues for Congress include the following:  December 2017 NSS and January 2018 NDS. Do the December 2017 NSS and the January 2018 NDS correctly describe or diagnose the shift in the international environment to a situation of renewed great power competition? As strategy documents, do they lay out an appropriate U.S. national security strategy and national defense strategy for responding to this shift?  Defense funding levels. In response to the shift to a situation of renewed great power competition, should defense funding levels in coming years be increased, reduced, or maintained at about the current level?  U.S. grand strategy. Should the United States continue to include, as a key element of U.S. grand strategy, a goal of preventing the emergence of a regional hegemon in one part of Eurasia or another?59 If not, what grand strategy should the United States pursue? What is the Trump Administration’s position on this issue?60  DOD organization. Is DOD optimally organized for renewed great power competition? What further changes, if any, should be made to better to better align DOD’s activities with those needed to counter Chinese and Russian military capabilities?  Nuclear weapons and nuclear deterrence. Are current DOD plans for modernizing U.S. strategic nuclear weapons, and for numbers and basing of nonstrategic (i.e., theater-range) nuclear weapons, aligned with the needs of the new situation of renewed great power competition?  Global allocation of U.S. military force deployments. Should the global allocation of U.S. military force deployments be altered, and if so, how? What 58 Department of Defense, FY2021 Defense Wide Review, Report to Congress, January 2020, pp. 2-6. 59 One observer states that this question was reviewed in 1992, at the beginning of the post-Cold War era: As a Pentagon planner in 1992, my colleagues and I considered seriously the idea of conceding to great powers like Russia and China their own spheres of influence, which would potentially allow the United States to collect a bigger “peace dividend” and spend it on domestic priorities. Ultimately, however, we concluded that the United States has a strong interest in precluding the emergence of another bipolar world—as in the Cold War—or a world of many great powers, as existed before the two world wars. Multipolarity led to two world wars and bipolarity resulted in a protracted worldwide struggle with the risk of nuclear annihilation. To avoid a return such circumstances, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney ultimately agreed that our objective must be to prevent a hostile power to dominate a “critical region,” which would give it the resources, industrial capabilities and population to pose a global challenge. This insight has guided U.S. defense policy throughout the post–Cold War era. (Zalmay Khalilzad, “4 Lessons about America’s Role in the World,” National Interest, March 23, 2016.) See also Hal Brands, “Don’t Let Great Powers Carve Up the World, Spheres of Influence Are Unnecessary and Dangerous,” Foreign Affairs, April 20, 2020. 60 For additional discussion of this issue, see CRS Report R44891, U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke and Michael Moodie. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 17 are the potential benefits and risks of shifting U.S. military force deployments out of some areas and into others? Should the Trump Administration’s proposals for changing the global allocation of U.S. military force deployments be approved, rejected, or modified?  New operational concepts. Are U.S. military services moving too slowly, too quickly, or at about the right speed in their efforts to develop new operational concepts in response to renewed great power competition, particularly against improving Chinese anti-access/area-denial (A2/AD) forces? What are the potential merits of these new operational concepts, and what steps are the services taking in terms of experiments and exercises to test and refine these concepts? To what degree are the services working to coordinate and integrate their new operational concepts on a cross-service basis?  U.S. and allied military capabilities in the Indo-Pacific region. Are the United States and its allies in the Indo-Pacific region taking appropriate and sufficient steps for countering China’s military capabilities in the Indo-Pacific region? To what degree will countering China’s military capabilities in the Indo-Pacific region require reductions in U.S. force deployments to other parts of the world?  U.S. and NATO military capabilities in Europe. Are the United States and its NATO allies taking appropriate and sufficient steps regarding U.S. and NATO military capabilities and operations for countering Russia’s military capabilities in Europe? What potential impacts would a strengthened U.S. military presence in Europe have on DOD’s ability to implement the military component of the U.S. strategic rebalancing toward the Indo-Pacific region? To what degree can or should the NATO allies in Europe take actions to strengthen deterrence against potential Russian aggression in Europe?  Capabilities for high-end conventional warfare. Are DOD’s plans for acquiring capabilities for high-end conventional warfare appropriate and sufficient? In a situation of constraints on defense funding, how should trade-offs be made in balancing capabilities for high-end conventional warfare against other DOD priorities?  Maintaining U.S. superiority in conventional weapon technologies. Are DOD’s steps for maintaining U.S. superiority in conventional weapon technologies appropriate and sufficient? What impact will funding these technologies have on funding available for nearer-term DOD priorities, such as redressing deficiencies in force readiness?  Innovation and speed in weapon system development and deployment. To what degree should defense acquisition policy and the paradigm for assessing the success of acquisition programs be adjusted to place greater emphasis on innovation and speed of development and deployment, and on experimentation, risk taking, and greater tolerance of failure during development? Are DOD’s steps for doing this appropriate and sufficient? What new legislative authorities, if any, might be required (or what existing provisions, if any, might need to be amended or repealed) to achieve greater innovation and speed in weapon development and deployment? What implications might placing a greater emphasis on speed of acquisition have on familiar congressional paradigms for conducting oversight and judging the success of defense acquisition programs?  Mobilization capabilities. What actions is DOD taking regarding mobilization capabilities for an extended-length conflict against an adversary such as China or Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 18 Russia, and are these actions appropriate? How much funding is being devoted to mobilization capabilities, and how are mobilization capabilities projected to change as a result of these actions in coming years?  Supple chain security. To what degree are Chinese or Russian components, subcomponents, materials, or software incorporated into DOD equipment? How good of an understanding does DOD have of this issue? What implications might this issue have for the reliability, maintainability, and reparability of U.S. military systems, particularly in time of war? What actions is DOD taking or planning to take to address supply chain security, particularly with regard to Chinese or Russian components, subcomponents, materials, and software? What impact might this issue have on U.S.-content requirements (aka Buy America requirements) for U.S. military systems?  Hybrid warfare and gray-zone tactics. Do the United States and its allies and partners have adequate strategies for countering Russia’s so-called hybrid warfare in eastern Ukraine, Russia’s information operations, and China’s so-called salami-slicing tactics in the South and East China Seas? Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 19 Appendix A. Background on Shift to Renewed Great Power Competition This appendix presents additional background information on the shift in the international security environment to a situation of renewed great power competition. For a list of articles on this shift, see Appendix B. Previous International Security Environments Cold War Era The Cold War era, which is generally viewed as lasting from the late 1940s until the late 1980s or early 1990s, was generally viewed as a strongly bipolar situation featuring two superpowers—the United States and the Soviet Union—engaged in a political, ideological, and military competition for influence across multiple geographic regions. The military component of that competition was often most acutely visible in Europe, where the U.S.-led NATO alliance and the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact alliance faced off against one another with large numbers of conventional forces and theater nuclear weapons, backed by longer-ranged strategic nuclear weapons. Post-Cold War Era The post-Cold War era is generally viewed as having begun in the late 1980s and early 1990s, following the fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1989, the disbanding of the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact military alliance in March 1991, and the dissolution of the Soviet Union into Russia and the former Soviet republics in December 1991, which were key events marking the ending of the Cold War. Compared to the Cold War, the post-Cold War era generally featured reduced levels of overt political, ideological, and military competition among major states. The post-Cold War era is generally viewed as having tended toward a unipolar situation, with the United States as the world’s sole superpower. Neither Russia, China, nor any other country was viewed as posing a significant challenge to either the United States’ status as the world’s sole superpower or the U.S.-led international order. Following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 (aka 9/11), the post-Cold War era was additionally characterized by a strong focus (at least from a U.S. perspective) on countering transnational terrorist organizations that had emerged as significant nonstate actors, particularly Al Qaeda. Era of Renewed Great Power Competition Overview Many observers have concluded that the post-Cold War era began to fade in 2006-2008, and that by 2014—following Chinese actions in the South and East China Seas61 and Russia’s seizure and annexation of Crimea62—the international environment had shifted to a fundamentally different 61 For discussions of these actions, see CRS Report R42784, U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke, and CRS Report R42930, Maritime Territorial Disputes in East Asia: Issues for Congress, by Ben Dolven, Mark E. Manyin, and Shirley A. Kan. 62 For discussion Russia’s seizure and annexation of Crimea, see CRS Report R45008, Ukraine: Background, Conflict with Russia, and U.S. Policy, by Cory Welt, and CRS In Focus IF10552, U.S. Sanctions on Russia Related to the Ukraine Conflict, by Cory Welt, Rebecca M. Nelson, and Dianne E. Rennack. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 20 situation of renewed great power competition with China and Russia and challenges by these two countries and others to elements of the U.S.-led international order that has operated since World War II. Some Key Features Observers view the new international security environment not as a bipolar situation (like the Cold War) or a unipolar situation (like the post-Cold War era), but as a situation characterized in substantial part by renewed competition among three major world powers—the United States, China, and Russia. Key features of the current situation of renewed great power competition include but are not necessarily limited to the following:  the use by Russia and China of new forms of aggressive or assertive military, paramilitary, information, and cyber operations—sometimes called hybrid warfare, gray-zone operations, ambiguous warfare, among other terms, in the case of Russia’s actions, and salami-slicing tactics or gray-zone warfare, among other terms, in the case of China’s actions;  renewed ideological competition, this time against 21st-century forms of authoritarianism and illiberal democracy in Russia, China, and other countries;  the promotion by China and Russia through their state-controlled media of nationalistic historical narratives emphasizing assertions of prior humiliation or victimization by Western powers, and the use of those narratives to support revanchist or irredentist foreign policy aims;  challenges by Russia and China to key elements of the U.S.-led international order, including the principle that force or threat of force should not be used as a routine or first-resort measure for settling disputes between countries, and the principle of freedom of the seas (i.e., that the world’s oceans are to be treated as an international commons); and  additional features alongside those listed above, including  continued regional security challenges from countries such as Iran and North Korea;  a continued focus (at least from a U.S. perspective) on countering transnational terrorist organizations that have emerged as significant nonstate actors (now including the Islamic State organization, among other groups); and  weak or failed states, and resulting weakly governed or ungoverned areas that can contribute to the emergence of (or serve as base areas or sanctuaries for) nonstate actors, and become potential locations of intervention by stronger states, including major powers. The December 2017 NSS states the following: Following the remarkable victory of free nations in the Cold War, America emerged as the lone superpower with enormous advantages and momentum in the world. Success, however, bred complacency.... As we took our political, economic, and military advantages for granted, other actors steadily implemented their long-term plans to challenge America and to advance agendas opposed to the United States, our allies, and our partners.... The United States will respond to the growing political, economic, and military competitions we face around the world. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 21 China and Russia challenge American power, influence, and interests, attempting to erode American security and prosperity. They are determined to make economies less free and less fair, to grow their militaries, and to control information and data to repress their societies and expand their influence. At the same time, the dictatorships of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the Islamic Republic of Iran are determined to destabilize regions, threaten Americans and our allies, and brutalize their own people. Transnational threat groups, from jihadist terrorists to transnational criminal organizations, are actively trying to harm Americans. While these challenges differ in nature and magnitude, they are fundamentally contests between those who value human dignity and freedom and those who oppress individuals and enforce uniformity. These competitions require the United States to rethink the policies of the past two decades—policies based on the assumption that engagement with rivals and their inclusion in international institutions and global commerce would turn them into benign actors and trustworthy partners. For the most part, this premise turned out to be false.... Three main sets of challengers—the revisionist powers of China and Russia, the rogue states of Iran and North Korea, and transnational threat organizations, particularly jihadist terrorist groups—are actively competing against the United States and our allies and partners. Although differing in nature and magnitude, these rivals compete across political, economic, and military arenas, and use technology and information to accelerate these contests in order to shift regional balances of power in their favor. These are fundamentally political contests between those who favor repressive systems and those who favor free societies. China and Russia want to shape a world antithetical to U.S. values and interests. China seeks to displace the United States in the Indo-Pacific region, expand the reaches of its state-driven economic model, and reorder the region in its favor. Russia seeks to restore its great power status and establish spheres of influence near its borders. The intentions of both nations are not necessarily fixed. The United States stands ready to cooperate across areas of mutual interest with both countries.... The United States must consider what is enduring about the problems we face, and what is new. The contests over influence are timeless. They have existed in varying degrees and levels of intensity, for millennia. Geopolitics is the interplay of these contests across the globe. But some conditions are new, and have changed how these competitions are unfolding. We face simultaneous threats from different actors across multiple arenas—all accelerated by technology. The United States must develop new concepts and capabilities to protect our homeland, advance our prosperity, and preserve peace.... Since the 1990s, the United States displayed a great degree of strategic complacency. We assumed that our military superiority was guaranteed and that a democratic peace was inevitable. We believed that liberal-democratic enlargement and inclusion would fundamentally alter the nature of international relations and that competition would give way to peaceful cooperation.... In addition, after being dismissed as a phenomenon of an earlier century, great power competition returned. China and Russia began to reassert their influence regionally and globally. Today, they are fielding military capabilities designed to deny America access in times of crisis and to contest our ability to operate freely in critical commercial zones during peacetime. In short, they are contesting our geopolitical advantages and trying to change the international order in their favor.63 The unclassified summary of the January 2018 NDS states the following: 63 Office of the President, National Security Strategy of the United States of America, December 2017, pp. 2-3, 25, 26-27. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 22 Today, we are emerging from a period of strategic atrophy, aware that our competitive military advantage has been eroding. We are facing increased global disorder, characterized by decline in the long-standing rules-based international order—creating a security environment more complex and volatile than any we have experienced in recent memory. Inter-state strategic competition, not terrorism, is now the primary concern in U.S. national security. China is a strategic competitor using predatory economics to intimidate its neighbors while militarizing features in the South China Sea. Russia has violated the borders of nearby nations and pursues veto power over the economic, diplomatic, and security decisions of its neighbors. As well, North Korea’s outlaw actions and reckless rhetoric continue despite United Nation’s censure and sanctions. Iran continues to sow violence and remains the most significant challenge to Middle East stability. Despite the defeat of ISIS’s physical caliphate, threats to stability remain as terrorist groups with long reach continue to murder the innocent and threaten peace more broadly.... The central challenge to U.S. prosperity and security is the reemergence of long-term, strategic competition by what the National Security Strategy classifies as revisionist powers. It is increasingly clear that China and Russia want to shape a world consistent with their authoritarian model—gaining veto authority over other nations’ economic, diplomatic, and security decisions.... Another change to the strategic environment is a resilient, but weakening, post-WWII international order.... China and Russia are now undermining the international order from within the system by exploiting its benefits while simultaneously undercutting its principles and “rules of the road.” Rogue regimes such as North Korea and Iran are destabilizing regions through their pursuit of nuclear weapons or sponsorship of terrorism.... Challenges to the U.S. military advantage represent another shift in the global security environment. For decades the United States has enjoyed uncontested or dominant superiority in every operating domain. We could generally deploy our forces when we wanted, assemble them where we wanted, and operate how we wanted. Today, every domain is contested—air, land, sea, space, and cyberspace.... The security environment is also affected by rapid technological advancements and the changing character of war.... States are the principal actors on the global stage, but non-state actors also threaten the security environment with increasingly sophisticated capabilities. Terrorists, trans-national criminal organizations, cyber hackers and other malicious non-state actors have transformed global affairs with increased capabilities of mass disruption. There is a positive side to this as well, as our partners in sustaining security are also more than just nation-states: multilateral organizations, non-governmental organizations, corporations, and strategic influencers provide opportunities for collaboration and partnership. Terrorism remains a persistent condition driven by ideology and unstable political and economic structures, despite the defeat of ISIS’s physical caliphate. It is now undeniable that the homeland is no longer a sanctuary. America is a target, whether from terrorists seeking to attack our citizens; malicious cyber activity against personal, commercial, or government infrastructure; or political and information subversion.... Long-term strategic competitions with China and Russia are the principal priorities for the Department, and require both increased and sustained investment, because of the magnitude of the threats they pose to U.S. security and prosperity today, and the potential for those threats to increase in the future. Concurrently, the Department will sustain its efforts to deter and counter rogue regimes such as North Korea and Iran, defeat terrorist Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 23 threats to the United States, and consolidate our gains in Iraq and Afghanistan while moving to a more resource-sustainable approach.64 Markers of Shift to Renewed Great Power Competition The sharpest single marker of the shift in the international security environment to a situation of renewed great power competition arguably was Russia’s seizure and annexation of Crimea in March 2014, which represented the first forcible seizure and annexation of one country’s territory by another country in Europe since World War II. Other markers of the shift—such as Russia’s actions in eastern Ukraine and elsewhere in Eastern Europe since March 2014, China’s economic growth and military modernization over the last several years, and China’s actions in the South and East China Seas over the last several years—have been more gradual and cumulative. The beginnings of the shift from the post-Cold War era to renewed great power competition can be traced to the period 2006-2008:  Freedom House’s annual report on freedom in the world for 2019 states, by the organization’s own analysis, that countries experiencing net declines in freedom have outnumbered countries experiencing net increases in freedom for 13 years in a row, starting in 2006.65  In February 2007, in a speech at an international security conference in Munich, Russian President Vladimir Putin criticized and rejected the concept of a unipolar power, predicted a shift to multipolar order, and affirmed an active Russian role in international affairs. Some observers view the speech in retrospect as prefiguring a more assertive and competitive Russian foreign policy.66  In 2008, Russia invaded and occupied part of the former Soviet republic of Georgia without provoking a strong cost-imposing response from the United States and its allies.67 Also in that year, the financial crisis and resulting deep recessions in the United States and Europe, combined with China’s ability to weather that crisis and its successful staging of the 2008 Summer Olympics, are seen by observers as having contributed to a perception in China of the United States as a declining power, and to a Chinese sense of self-confidence or triumphalism.68 China’s assertive actions in the South and East China Seas can be viewed as having begun (or accelerated) soon thereafter. Other observers trace the roots of the shift to renewed great power competition further, to years prior to 2006-2008.69 64 Department of Defense, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America: Sharpening the American Military’s Competitive Edge, undated but released January 2018, pp. 1-4. Emphasis as in original. 65 Freedom in the World 2019, Freedom House, undated but released February 2019, p. 5. 66 For an English-language transcript of the speech, see “Putin’s Prepared Remarks at 43rd Munich Conference on Security Policy,” Washington Post, accessed April 26, 2018, at http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/02/12/AR2007021200555.html. 67 See, for example, Robert Kagan, “Believe It or Not, Trump’s Following a Familiar Script on Russia,” Washington Post, August 7, 2018. For a response, see Condoleezza Rice, “Russia Invaded Georgia 10 Years Ago. Don’t Say America Didn’t Respond.” Washington Post, August 8, 2018. See also Mikheil Saakashvili, “When Russia Invaded Georgia,” Wall Street Journal, August 7, 2018. 68 See, for example, Howard W. French, “China’s Dangerous Game,” Atlantic, October 13, 2014. 69 See, for example, Paul Blustein, “The Untold Story of How George W. Bush Lost China,” Foreign Policy, October Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 24 Comparisons to Past International Security Environments Some observers seek to better understand the current situation of renewed great power competition in part by comparing it to past international security environments. Each international security environment features its own combination of major actors, dimensions of competition and cooperation among those actors, and military and other technologies available to them. A given international security environment can have some similarities to previous ones, but it will also have differences, including, potentially, one or more features not present in any other international security environment. In the early years of a new international security environment, some of its features may be unclear, in dispute, not yet apparent, or subject to evolution. In attempting to understand an international security environment, comparisons to other ones are potentially helpful in identifying avenues of investigation. If applied too rigidly, however, such comparisons can act as intellectual straightjackets, making it more difficult to achieve a full understanding of a given international security environment’s characteristic features, particularly those that differentiate it from previous ones. Some observers have stated that the world has entered a new Cold War (or Cold War II or 2.0). That term may have some utility in referring specifically to U.S.-Russian or U.S.-Chinese relations, because the era of renewed great power competition features competition and tension with Russia and China. Considered more broadly, however, the Cold War was a bipolar situation with the United States and Russia, while the era of renewed great power competition is a situation that also includes China as a major competing power. The bipolarity of the Cold War, moreover, was reinforced by the opposing NATO and Warsaw Pact alliances, whereas in contrast, Russia and China today do not lead an equivalent of the Warsaw Pact. And while terrorists were a concern during the Cold War, the U.S. focus on countering transnational terrorist groups was not nearly as significant during the Cold War as it has been since 9/11. Other observers, viewing the renewal of great power competition, have drawn comparisons to the multipolar situation that existed in the 19th century and the years prior to World War I. Still others, observing the promotion in China and Russia of nationalistic historical narratives supporting revanchist or irredentist foreign policy aims, have drawn comparisons to the 1930s. Those two earlier situations, however, did not feature a strong focus on countering globally significant transnational terrorist groups, and the military and other technologies available then differ vastly from those available today. The current period of renewed great power competition may be similar in some respects to previous situations, but it also differs from previous situations in certain respects, and might be best understood by direct observation and identification of its key features. Naming the Current Situation Observers viewing the international security environment have given it various names, but names using some variation of great power competition or renewed great power competition appear to have become to most commonly used in public policy discussion. As noted earlier, some observers have also used the term Cold War (or New Cold War, or Cold War II or 2.0), particularly in reference to the U.S.-China relationship. Other terms that have been used include competitive world order, multipolar era, tripolar era, and disorderly world (or era). 2, 2019; Walter Russell Mead, “Who’s to Blame for a World in Flames?” The American Interest, October 6, 2014; Robert Kagan, “End of Dreams, Return of History,” Policy Review (Hoover Institution), July 17, 2007. See also Thomas P. Ehrhard, “Treating the Pathologies of Victory: Hardening the Nation for Strategic Competition,” p. 23, in 2020 Index of U.S. Military Strength, Heritage Foundation, 2020. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 25 Congress and the Previous Shift The previous major change in the international security environment—the shift in the late 1980s and early 1990s from the Cold War to the post-Cold War era—prompted a broad reassessment by the DOD and Congress of defense funding levels, strategy, and missions that led to numerous changes in DOD plans and programs. Many of these changes were articulated in the 1993 Bottom-Up Review (BUR),70 a reassessment of U.S. defense plans and programs whose very name conveyed the fundamental nature of the reexamination that had occurred.71 In general, the BUR reshaped the U.S. military into a force that was smaller than the Cold War U.S. military, and oriented toward a planning scenario being able to conduct two major regional contingencies (MRCs) rather than the Cold War planning scenario of a NATO-Warsaw Pact conflict.72 For additional discussion of Congress’s response to the shift from the Cold War to the post-Cold War era, see Appendix E. 70 See Department of Defense, Report on the Bottom-Up Review, Les Aspin, Secretary of Defense, October 1993, 109 pp. 71 Secretary of Defense Les Aspin’s introduction to DOD’s report on the 1993 BUR states the following: In March 1993, I initiated a comprehensive review of the nation’s defense strategy, force structure, modernization, infrastructure, and foundations. I felt that a department-wide review needed to be conducted “from the bottom up” because of the dramatic changes that have occurred in the world as a result of the end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union. These changes in the international security environment have fundamentally altered America’s security needs. Thus, the underlying premise of the Bottom-Up Review was that we needed to reassess all of our defense concepts, plans, and programs from the ground up. (Department of Defense, Report on the Bottom-Up Review, Les Aspin, Secretary of Defense, October 1993, p. iii.) 72 For additional discussion of the results of the BUR, see CRS Report 93-839 F, Defense Department Bottom-Up Review: Results and Issues, October 6, 1993, 6 pp., by Edward F. Bruner, and CRS Report 93-627 F, Defense Department Bottom-Up Review: The Process, July 2, 1993, 9 pp., by Cedric W. Tarr Jr. (both nondistributable and available to congressional clients from the author of this report). Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 26 Appendix B. Articles on Shift to Renewed Great Power Competition This appendix presents citations to articles by or about observers who have concluded that the international security environment has undergone a shift from the post-Cold War era to a new and different situation. Citation from 2007 Robert Kagan, “End of Dreams, Return of History,” Policy Review (Hoover Institution), July 17, 2007. Citations from Late-2013 and 2014 Walter Russell Mead, “The End of History Ends,” The American Interest, December 2, 2013. Paul David Miller, “Crimea Proves That Great Power Rivalry Never Left Us,” Foreign Policy, March 21, 2014. Stephen M. Walt, “The Bad Old Days Are Back,” Foreign Policy, May 2, 2014. Walter Russell Mead, “The Return of Geopolitics,” Foreign Affairs, May/June 2014. Robert Kagan, “Superpowers Don’t Get to Retire,” New Republic, May 26, 2014. James Kitfield, “The New Great Power Triangle Tilt: China, Russia Vs. U.S.,” Breaking Defense, June 19, 2014. Lilia Shevtsova, “Putin Ends the Interregnum,” The American Interest, August 28, 2014. David E. Sanger, “Commitments on Three Fronts Test Obama’s Foreign Policy,” New York Times, September 3, 2014. Steven Erlanger, “NATO’s Hopes for Russia Have Turned to Dismay,” New York Times, September 12, 2014. Richard N. Haass, “The Era of Disorder,” Project Syndicate, October 27, 2014. Citations from January through June 2015 Bruce Jones, “What Strategic Environment Does the Transatlantic Community Confront?” German Marshall Fund of the United States, Policy Brief, January 15, 2015, 5 pp. Chester A Crocker, “The Strategic Dilemma of a World Adrift,” Survival, February-March 2015: 7-30. Robert Kagan, “The United States Must Resist A Return to Spheres of Interest in in the International System,” Brookings Institution, February 19, 2015. Richard Fontaine, “Salvaging Global Order,” The National Interest, March 10, 2015. Barry Pavel and Peter Engelke with Alex Ward, Dynamic Stability, US Strategy for a World in Transition, Washington, Atlantic Council, April 2015, 57 pp. Stewart Patrick and Isabella Bennett, “Geopolitics Is Back—and Global Governance Is Out,” The National Interest, May 12, 2015. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 27 “Rise of the Regional Hegemons,” Wall Street Journal, May 25, 2015. Frank G. Hoffman and Ryan Neuhard, “Is the World Getting Safer—or Not?” Foreign Policy Research Institute, June 2015. Citations from July through December 2015 James Kitfield, “Requiem For The Obama Doctrine,” Breaking Defense, July 6, 2015. Mathew Burrows and Robert A. Manning, “America’s Worst Nightmare: Russia and China Are Getting Closer,” National Interest, August 24, 2015. Robert Farley, “Yes, America’s Military Supremacy Is Fading (And We Should Not Panic),” National Interest, September 21, 2015. John McLaughlin, “The Geopolitical Rules You Didn’t Know About Are Under Siege,” Ozy, November 10, 2015. Citations from January through June 2016 John E. McLaughlin, “US Strategy and Strategic Culture from 2017,” Global Brief, February 19, 2016. H.R. McMaster, “Probing for Weakness,” Wall Street Journal, March 23, 2016. Zbigniew Brzezinski, “Toward a Global Realignment,” The American Interest, April 17, 2016. Michael J. Boyle, “The Coming Illiberal Order,” Survival, Vol. 58, April-May 2016: 35-66. Kurt Campbell, et al., Extending American Power, Center for a New American Security, May 2016, 18 pp. Michael Mandelbaum, “America in a New World,” The American Interest, May 23, 2016. Citations from July through December 2016 Michael Lind, “Can America Share Its Superpower Status?” National Interest, August 21, 2016. Bret Stephens, “The New Dictators’ Club,” Wall Street Journal, August 22, 2016. Gregory R. Copley, “The Era of Strategic Containment is Over,” Defense & Foreign Affairs, September 7, 2016. Ulrich Speck, “The Crisis of Liberal Order,” American Interest, September 12, 2016. Aaron Kliegman, “Robert D. Kaplan: Think Tragically to Avoid Tragedy,” Washington Free Beacon, September 16, 2016. Lauren Villagran, “Former Defense Secretary Describes ‘New World Order,’” Stars and Stripes, September 14, 2016. George F. Will, “Vladimir Putin Is Bringing Back the 1930s,” Washington Post, October 7, 2016. Philip Stephens, “How the West Has Lost the World,” Financial Times, October 12, 2016. John Sawers, “We Are Returning to a World of Great-Power Rivalry,” Financial Times, October 19, 2016. Patrick Wintour, Luke Harding, and Julian Borger, “Cold War 2.0: How Russia and the West Reheated a Historic Struggle,” The Guardian, October 24, 2016. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 28 John Schaus, “U.S. Leadership in an Era of Great Power Competition,” Defense 360 (Center for Strategic & International Studies), December 2016. Charles Krauthammer, “After a Mere 25 Years, the Triumph of the West Is Over,” Washington Post, December 1, 2016. Julia Ioffe, “The End of the End of the Cold War,” Foreign Policy, December 21, 2016. Citations from January through June 2017 Richard Haass, “World Order 2.0,” Foreign Affairs, January/February 2017: 2-9. Joseph S. Nye Jr., “Will the Liberal Order Survive,” Foreign Affairs, January/February 2017: 10-16. Molly K. McKew, “Putin’s Real Long Game,” Politico Magazine, January 1, 2017. Robert J. Samuelson, “The New World Order, 2017,” Washington Post, January 1, 2017. Martin Wolf, “Martin Wolf: The Long and Painful Journey to World Disorder,” Financial Times, January 5, 2017. Kimberly Dozier, “U.S. Spies See a World of Trumps Ahead,” Daily Beast, January 9, 2017. Kenneth Roth, “We Are on the Verge of Darkness,” Foreign Policy, January 12, 2017. Thomas Donnelly, “Now for the Post-Post-Cold War Era,” Weekly Standard, January 23, 2017. Evan Osnos, David Remnick, and Joshua Yaffa, “Trump, Putin, and the New Cold War,” New Yorker, March 6, 2017. Paul Berman, “The Counterrevolution,” Tablet, March 7, 2017. James Kirchick, “The Road to a Free Europe Goes Through Moscow,” Politico Magazine, March 17, 2017. Andrew A. Michta, “The Deconstruction of the West,” American Interest, April 12, 2017. Michael Mazarr and Hal Brands, “Navigating Great Power Rivalry in the 21st Century,” War on the Rocks, April 5, 2017. Robert D. Kaplan, “The Return of Marco Polo’s World and the U.S. Military Response,” Center for a New American Security, undated but posted ca. May 12, 2017. Hal Brands and Eric Edelman, “America and the Geopolitics of Upheaval,” National Interest, June 21, 2017. Christopher Walker, “A New Era of Competition,” International Reports (Konrad Adenauer Foundation), No. 2, 2017: 16-25. Citations from July 2017 through December 2017 Hal Brands, Charles Edel, “The Gathering Storm vs. the Crisis of Confidence,” Foreign Policy, July 14, 2017. Leon Hadar, “Why Washington’s Global Strategy Failed,” National Interest, July 30, 2017. Paul Mason, “Democracy Is Dying—and It’s Startling How Few People Are Worried,” The Guardian, July 31, 2017. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 29 Harvey M. Sapolsky, “America’s Endless Search for a Strategy,” National Interest, August 4, 2017. Philip Zelikow, “Is the World Slouching Toward a Grave Systemic Crisis?” Atlantic, August 11, 2017. Robert D. Kaplan, “America’s Darwinian Nationalism,” National Interest, August 13, 2017. He Yafei, “The ‘American Century’ Has Come to Its End,” Global Times, August 20, 2017. He Yafei, “New World Order is the Inevitable Trend,” China Daily, August 21, 2017. Michael Lind, “There’s No Such Thing as ‘The’ Liberal World Order,” National Interest, September 5, 2017. Thorsten Benner, “An Era of Authoritarian Influence? How Democracies Should Respond,” Foreign Affairs, September 15, 2017. Hal Brands, “America’s New World Order Is Officially Dead,” Bloomberg, September 27, 2017. Andrew A. Michta, “The Crisis of Elite Authority in the West,” American Interest, September 27, 2017. Erica Frantz and Andrea Kendall-Taylor, “The Evolution of Autocracy: Why Authoritarianism Is Becoming More Formidable,” Survival, October-November 2017: 57-68. Larry Diamond, “Is There a Crisis of Liberal democracy?” American Interest, October 13, 2017. Colin Dueck and Ming Wan, “An Era of Great-Power Leaders,” National Interest, November 7, 2017. Brendan Nicholson, “The Strategist Six: Thomas Mahnken,” The Strategist, November 7, 2017. (Interview with Thomas Mahnken) Citations from January 2018 “The Growing Danger of Great-Power Conflict,” Economist, January 25, 2018. Alan Dupont, “New World Order: Momentum Is Shifting in Favour of Dictators,” Australian, February 10, 2018. Gabriel Glickman, “Back to the Future: The Potential of Great-Power Conflict,” National Interest, February 12, 2018. Eliot A. Cohen, “Witnessing the Collapse of the Global Elite,” Atlantic, February 19, 2018. Hal Brands, “The ‘American Century’ Is Over, and It Died in Syria,” Bloomberg, March 8, 2018. Richard N. Haass, “Liberal World Order, RIP,” The Strategist (ASPI), March 24, 2018. Michael Lind, “America vs. Russia and China: Welcome to Cold War II,” National Interest, April 15, 2018. Nick Danforth, “What’s So Disordered About Your World Order?” War on the Rocks, June 20, 2018. Thomas P. Ehrhard, “Treating the Pathologies of Victory: Hardening the Nation for Strategic Competition,” Heritage Foundation, October 30, 2019. Fred Kaplan, “The Decade Big Power Politics Returned,” Slate, December 16, 2019. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 30 Elbridge A. Colby and A. Wess Mitchell, “The Age of Great-Power Competition,” Foreign Affairs, January/February 2020. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 31 Appendix C. Articles on Grand Strategy and Geopolitics This appendix presents citations to articles discussing grand strategy and geopolitics for the United States in the new international security environment. Citations from 2012 through 2014 William C. Martel, “Why America Needs a Grand Strategy,” Diplomat, June 18, 2012. Aaron David Miller, “The Naiveté of Distance,” Foreign Policy, March 31, 2014. Robert Kaplan, “The Gift of American Power,” Real Clear World, May 15, 2014. William C. Martel, “America’s Grand Strategy Disaster,” The National Interest, June 9, 2014. Adam Garfinkle, “The Silent Death of American Grand Strategy,” American Review, 2014. Christopher A. Ford, “Ending the Strategic Holiday: U.S. Grand Strategy and a ‘Rising’ China,” Asia Policy, Number 18 (July 2014): 181-189. William Ruger, “A Realist’s Guide to Grand Strategy,” The American Conservative, August 26, 2014. Barry R. Posen, Restraint: A New Foundation for U.S. Grand Strategy, Cornell University Press, 2014, 256 pp. (Cornell Studies in Security Affairs). R. D. Hooker, The Grand Strategy of the United States, Washington, National Defense University Press, October 2014, 35 pp. (INSS Strategic Monograph, Institute for National Strategic Studies). F.G. Hoffman, “Grand Strategy: The Fundamental Considerations,” Orbis, Volume 58, Issue 4 (Fall 2014), 2014: 472–485. Michael Page, “Is ‘Restraint’ a Realistic Grand Strategy?” Cicero Magazine, October 21, 2014. Bryan McGrath, “Unconstrained Grand Strategy,” War on the Rocks October 28, 2014. Joseph Sarkisian, “American Grand Strategy or Grand Illusion?” Cicero, December 1, 2014. Citations from January through June 2015 Chris Miller, “State of Disunion: America’s Lack of Strategy is its Own Greatest Threat, Cicero, January 27, 2015. Jerry Hendrix, Avoiding Trivia: A Strategy for Sustainment and Fiscal Responsibility, Center for a New American Security, February 2015, 36 pp. Jim Mattis, “A New American Grand Strategy,” Hoover Institution, February 26, 2015. Stewart Patrick and Isabella Bennett, “Geopolitics Is Back—and Global Governance Is Out,” The National Interest, May 12, 2015. Alfred McCoy, “The Geopolitics of American Global Decline,” Real Clear World, June 8, 2015. Steve LeVine, “How China Is Building the Biggest Commercial-Military Empire in History,” Defense One, June 9, 2015. Thomas Vien, “The Grand Design of China’s New Trade Routes,” Stratfor, June 24, 2015. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 32 Citations from July through December 2015 John R. Deni, “General Dunford Is Right About Russia, But Not Because of Their Nukes,” War on the Rocks, July 13, 2015. Frederick W. Kagan and Kimberly Kagan, “Putin Ushers in a New Era of Global Geopolitics,” AEI Warning Intelligence Update, September 27, 2015. Gideon Rachman, “A Global Test of American Power,” Financial Times, October 12, 2015. Joschka Fischer, “The Return of Geopolitics to Europe,” Project Syndicate, November 2, 2015. Marian Leighton, “Go South, Young Russian,” Weekly Standard, December 28, 2015. Citations from January through June 2016 John E. McLaughlin, “US Strategy and Strategic Culture from 2017,” Global Brief, February 19, 2016. Michael Auslin, “Asia’s Mediterranean: Strategy, Geopolitics, and Risk in the Seas of the Indo-Pacific,” War on the Rocks, February 29, 2016. Eliot Cohen, Eric S. Edelman, and Brian Hook, “Presidential Priority: Restore American Leadership, World Affairs, Spring 2016. H.R. McMaster, “Probing for Weakness,” Wall Street Journal, March 23, 2016. Parag Khanna, “The Brilliance of China’s Grand Strategy: Don’t ‘Own’ Land, Just ‘Use’ It,” The National Interest, April 11, 2016. Seth Cropsey, “New American Grand Strategy,” Real Clear Defense, April 13, 2016. Zbigniew Brzezinski, “Toward a Global Realignment,” The American Interest, April 17, 2016. Michael Mandelbaum, “America in a New World,” The American Interest, May 23, 2016. Robert D. Blackwell, “China’s Strategy for Asia: Maximize Power, Replace America,” National Interest, May 26, 2016. John J. Mearsheimer and Stephen M. Walt, “The Case for Offshore Balancing,” Foreign Affairs, June 13, 2016. Stephen Sestanovich, “Do Americans Want a New ‘Grand Strategy’ or Less Overseas Engagement?” Wall Street Journal, June 16, 2016. Denny Roy, “A More-Selective US Grand Strategy,” PacNet #53 (Pacific Forum CSIS), June 29, 2016. Citations from July through September 2016 Frank G. Hoffman, “Retreating Ashore: The Flaws of Offshore Balancing,” Foreign Policy Research Institute, July 5, 2017. James Holmes, “Why Offshore Balancing Won’t Work,: National Interest, July 18, 2016. Schuyler Foerster and Ray Raymond, “Balanced Internationalism: 5 Core Principles to Guide U.S. National Security Policy,” National Interest, July 31, 2016. Robert D. Kaplan, “Is Primacy Overrated?” National Interest, August 7, 2016. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 33 Barry R. Posen, “The High Costs and Limited Benefits of America’s Alliances,” National Interest, August 7, 2016. Christopher Preble, Emma Ashford, and Travis Evans, “Let’s Talk about America’s Strategic Choices,” War on the Rocks, August 8, 2016. Ted Galen Carpenter and Eric Gomez, “East Asia and a Strategy of Restraint,” War on the Rocks, August 10, 2016. Michael Lind, “Can America Share Its Superpower Status?” National Interest, August 21, 2016. Doug Bandow, “Why Washington Is Addicted to Perpetual War,” National Interest, August 28, 2016. Andrew J. Bacevich, “Ending Endless War,” Foreign Affairs, September/October 2016. Frank Hoffman, “The Consistent Incoherence of Grand Strategy,” War on the Rocks, September 1, 2016. Gregory R. Copley, “The Era of Strategic Containment is Over,” Defense & Foreign Affairs, September 7, 2016. Barry F. Lowenkron and Mitchell B. Reiss, “Pragmatic Primacy: How America Can Move Forward in a Changing World,” National Interest, September 11, 2016. William Ruger, “The Myth of American Retreat,” American Conservative, September 13, 2016. Christopher Preble, “New Rules for U.S. Military Intervention,” War on the Rocks, September 20, 2016. Anders Fogh Rasmussen, “Free Nations of the World, Unite!” National Review, September 22, 2016. Citations from October through December 2016 Michael J. Mazarr, “The World Has Passed the Old Grand Strategies By,” War on the Rocks, October 5, 2016. Max Fisher and Amanda Taub, “Syria Provokes an American Anxiety: Is U.S. Power Really So Special?” New York Times, October 8, 2016. Uri Friedman, “Donald Trump and the Coming Test of International Order,” Atlantic, November 9, 2016. Robert Kagan, “Trump Marks the End of America As World’s ‘Indispensable Nation,’” Financial Times, November 19, 2016. Hugh White, “What’s So Great About American World Leadership?” Atlantic, November 23, 2016. Peter Feaver, “A Grand Strategy Challenge Awaits Trump,” Foreign Policy, November 29, 2016. Hal Brands and Peter Feaver, “Stress-Testing American Grand Strategy,” Survival, vol. 58, 2016, Issue 6: 93-120 (published online November 21, 2016) (see also Hal Brands and Peter Feaver, “Stress-Testing the Foundations of American Grand Strategy,” War on the Rocks, December 13, 2016). Christopher A. Preble, “Should the United States Wage War for Friends?” National Interest, December 15, 2016. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 34 Citations from January through June 2017 Andrew F. Krepinevich, Preserving the Balance, A U.S. Eurasia Defense Strategy, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2017, 117 pp. Hal Brands et al., Critical Assumptions and American Grand Strategy, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2017, 57 pp. Kori Schake, “Will Washington Abandon the Order?” Foreign Affairs, January/February 2017: 41-46. Robert D. Kaplan, “Why Trump Can’t Disengage America From the World,” New York Times, January 6, 2017. Frank Hoffman, “The Case for Strategic Discipline During the Next Presidency,” War on the Rocks, January 10, 2017. Robert “Jake” Bebber and Richard J. Harknett, “Thoughts on Grand Strategy,” The Navalist, January 12, 2017. Colin Kahl and Hal Brands, “Trump’s Grand Strategic Train Wreck,” Foreign Policy, January 31, 2017. Robert Kaplan, “America Is a Maritime Nation,” Real Clear Defense, January 24, 2017. Robert Kagan, “Backing Into World War III,” Foreign Policy, February 6, 2017. David H. Petraeus, “America Must Stand Tall,” Politico Magazine, February 6, 2017. Randall L. Schweller, “A Third-Image Explanation for Why Trump Now: A Response to Robert Jervis’s ‘President Trump and IR Theory,’” ISSF Policy Series, February 8, 2017. Stephen M. Walt, “The Donald versus ‘The Blob,’” ISSF Policy Series, February 14, 2017. Ash Jain, et al., Strategy of “Constrainment:” Countering Russia’s Challenge to the Democratic Order, Atlantic Council, March 2017, 23 pp. Robert C. Rubel, “Exporting Security: China, the United States, and the Innovator’s Dilemma,” Naval War College Review, Spring 2017, pp. 11-28. Paul Miller, “Reassessing Obama’s Legacy of Restraint,” War on the Rocks, March 6, 2017. Mercy A. Kuo, “Statecraft and Grand Strategy: Assessing the US and China,” Diplomat, March 31, 2017. Patrick Cronin, “Maritime Power and U.S. Strategic Influence in Asia,” War on the Rocks, April 11, 2017. Hal Brands, “America’s Allies Are in Decline. Here’s How the US Should Adjust,” Defense One, May 5, 2017. Robert D. Kaplan, “The Return of Marco Polo’s World and the U.S. Military Response,” Center for a New American Security, undated but posted ca. May 12, 2017. Jane Perlez and Yufan Huang, “Behind China’s $1 Trillion Plan to Shake Up the Economic Order,” New York Times, May 13, 2017. Jane Perlez and Keith Bradsher, “Xi Jinping Positions China at Center of New Economic Order,” New York Times, May 14, 2017. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 35 Citations from July 2017 through December 2017 Prince Michael of Liechtenstein, “Opinion: Control of Trade Routes Is Decisive,” Geopolitical Intelligence Services, July 21, 2017. Andrew Beddow, “America Cannot Become a Global Rome,” National Interest, July 25, 2017. Enea Gjoza, “America Historically Had a Restrained Foreign Policy: It’s Time to Return to It,” National Interest, July 25, 2017. Leon Hadar, “Why Washington’s Global Strategy Failed,” National Interest, July 30, 2017. Harvey M. Sapolsky, “America’s Endless Search for a Strategy,” National Interest, August 4, 2017. David Haas and Jack McKechnie, “U.S. Peacetime Strategy with China,” EastWest Institute, August 11, 2017. Robert D. Kaplan, “America’s Darwinian Nationalism,” National Interest, August 13, 2017. Andrew A. Michta, “The West Needs a Strategy,” American Interest, August 25, 2017. Auston Long, Linda Robinson, and Seth G. Jones, “Managing Chaos in an Era of Great Power Competition,” War on the Rocks, September 5, 2017. Daniel Kliman, “Wanted: A U.S. Strategic Response to China’s Belt and Road Initiative,” National Interest, September 7, 2017. James Jay Carafano, America Desperately Needs a New Grand Strategy for its Role in the World, Heritage Foundation, September 11, 2017. Thorsten Benner, “An Era of Authoritarian Influence? How Democracies Should Respond,” Foreign Affairs, September 15, 2017. Dean Cheng, Confronting the Eurasian Powers of Russia and China, Heritage Foundation, September 28, 2017. Matthew Kroenig and Miyeon Oh, A Strategy for the Trans-Pacific Century: Final Report of the Atlantic Council’s Asia-Pacific Strategy Task Force, Atlantic Council, October 2017, 58 pp. (Atlantic Council Strategy Paper No. 12) Gal Luft, Silk Road 2.0: US Strategy toward China’s Belt and Road Initiative, Atlantic Council, October 2017, 59 pp. (Atlantic Council Strategy Paper No. 11) Mercy A. Kuo, “US Leadership in Asia and the Future of Geopolitics, Insights from Jamie Fly,” Diplomat, October 11, 2017. David Santoro, “Collective Security Is America’s Only Hope,” National Interest, October 15, 2017. C. Raja Mohan, “The Confluence of Two Seas,” Indian Express, October 26, 2017. Ionut Popescu, “Grand Strategy Is Overrated,” Foreign Policy, December 11, 2017. Citations from January 2018 through June 2018 Francis P. Sempa, “Needed: A National Security Strategy Rooted in Geopolitics,” Real Clear Defense, January 9, 2018. Benn Steil, “How to Win a Great-Power Competition,” Foreign Affairs, February 9, 2018. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 36 Alasdair Roberts, “Grand Strategy Isn’t Grand Enough,” Foreign Policy, February 20, 2018. Francis P. Sempa, “Mackinder’s Century,” Real Clear Defense, March 2, 2018. Jennifer Loy, “Mackinder and Mahan: The Chinese Geopolitics in South Asia,” Real Clear Defense, March 15, 2018. Ionut Popescu, “Trump Doesn’t Need a Grand Strategy,” Foreign Affairs, May 21, 2018. Thomas P. Cavanna, “What Does China’s Belt and Road Initiative Mean for US Grand Strategy?” Diplomat, June 5, 2018. Citations from July 2018 John Schuessler, “Making Grand Strategy Grand Again,” National Interest, July 25, 2018. Andrew Erickson, “Make China Great Again: Xi’s Truly Grand Strategy,” War on the Rocks, October 30, 2019. Jasen J. Castillo, “Don’t Leave Grand Strategy to the Generals,” National Interest, October 31, 2019. Elizabeth Cobbs and Kimberly C. Field, “Why Did the U.S. Kill Suleimani? The Attack Illustrates America’s Lack of a Clear Grand Strategy—and Why We Need One Immediately,” New York Times, January 7, 2020. Amy Zegart, “The Race for Big Ideas Is On, The United States Faces Genuinely New Global Challenges—But Tries to Understand Them Using Outmoded Theories from a Bygone Era,” Atlantic, January 13, 2020. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 37 Appendix D. Articles on Russia’s Hybrid Warfare Tactics This appendix presents citations to articles discussing Russia’s hybrid warfare tactics and possible U.S. strategies for countering those tactics. Citations from July through September 2015 Thomas Gibbons-Neff, “The ‘New’ Type of War That Finally Has The Pentagon’s Attention,” Washington Post, July 3, 2015. Mark Galeotti, “Time to Think About ‘Hybrid Defense,’” War on the Rocks, July 30, 2015. A. Wess Mitchell, “The Case for Deterrence by Denial,” American Interest, August 12, 2015. Audrey Kurth Cronin, “The Changing Face Of War In The 21st Century,” Real Clear Defense, August 18, 2015. Aapo Cederberg and Pasi Eronen, “Wake Up, West! The Era of Hyrbid Warfare Is Upon Us,” Overt Action, August 25, 2015. Marcus Weisgerber, “Now NATO’s Prepping for Hybrid War,” Defense One, August 27, 2015. Maria Snegovaya, Putin’s Information Warfare in Ukraine, Washington, Institute for the Study of War, September 2015, 26 pp. Citations from October through December 2015 Jan Joel Andersson and Thierry Tardy, Hybrid: What’s In a Name?, European Union Institute for Security Studies, October 2015, 4 pp. Megan Eckstein, “U.S. Naval Commander in Europe: NATO Needs to Adapt to Russia’s New Way of Hybrid Warfare,” USNI News, October 6, 2015. Tony Wesolowsky and Mark Krutov, “Activist Says Russia Using ‘Hybrid Warfare’ in Syria,” Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, November 11, 2015. Howard Altman, “’Gray Zone Conflicts Far More Complex to Combat, Says Socom Chief Votel,” Tampa Tribune, November 28, 2015 (pdated November 29, 2015). Jordan Chandler Hirsch and Peter Feaver, “Obama’s Thin Gray Line,” Foreign Policy, December 2, 2015. Eric Olsen, “America’s Not Ready for Today’s Gray Wars,” Defense One, December 10, 2015. Adam Elkus, “50 Shades of Gray: Why Gray Wars Concept Lacks Strategic Sense,” War on the Rocks, December 15, 2015. Peter Pomerantsev, “Fighting While Friending: The Grey War Advantage of ISIS, Russia, and China,” Defense One, December 29, 2015. Citations from January through June 2016 David S. Maxwell, “Congress Has Embraced Unconventional Warfare: Will the US Military and The Rest of the US Government?” Small Wars Journal, December 29, 2016. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 38 Joseph L. Votel, et al., “Unconventional Warfare in the Gray Zone,” Joint Force Quarterly, 1st Quarter 2016: 101-109. Julian E. Barnes, “NATO Works to Adapt to More Ambiguous Warfare Techniques,” Wall Street Journal, February 8, 2016. Andreas Umland, Russia’s Pernicious Hybrid War Against Ukraine, Atlantic Council, February 22, 2016. Maxim Trudolyubov, “Russia’s Hybrid War,” New York Times, February 24, 2016. Bret Perry, “How NATO Can Disrupt Russia’s New Way of War,” Defense One, March 3, 2016; Michael Kofman, “Russian Hybrid Warfare and Other Dark Arts,” War on the Rocks, March 11, 2016. Eerik-Niiles Kross, “Putin’s War of Smoke and Mirrors,” Politico, April 9, 2016. Molly McKew, “Estonian Report Details Russia’s ‘Hybrid Threat’ to Europe,” Washington Free Beacon, April 18, 2016. David Barno and Nora Bensahel, “A New Generation of Unrestricted Warfare,” War on the Rocks, April 19, 2016. Nathan Freier and Christopher Compton, “Gray Zone: Why We’re Losing the New Era of National Security,” Defense One, June 9, 2016. Citations from July through December 2016 Dan Goure, “NATO vs. Russia: How to Counter the Hybrid Warfare Challenge,” National Interest, July 7, 2016. Dominik P. Jankowski, “Hybrid Warfare: A Known Unknown?” Foreign Policy Blogs, July 18, 2016. Nicholas Fedyk, “Russian ‘New Generation’ Warfare: Theory, Practice, and Lessons for U.S. Strategists,” Small Wars Journal, August 25, 2016. Martin N. Murphy, Understanding Russia’s Concept for Total War in Europe, Heritage Foundation, September 12, 2016. Robert Caruso, “To Counter Russian Disinformation, Look to Cold War Tactics,” Defense One, September 20, 2016. Max Boot, “How to Wage Hybrid War on the Kremlin,” Foreign Policy, December 13, 2016. Citations from January through June 2017 Raine Tiessalo, “Finland Prepares for ‘Manifold Warfare’ as Russia Feeds Paranoia,” Bloomberg, January 19, 2017. Tim Mak, “U.S. Preps for Infowar on Russia,” Daily Beast, February 6, 2017. Joe Gould, “European Diplomats Urge Support for U.S. Soft Power Against Russia,” Defense News, March 7, 2017. Jakub Janda, Six Immediate Steps to Stop Putin’s Aggression, Atlantic Council, March 13, 2017. Jussi Rosendahl and Tuomas Forsell, “EU, NATO Countries Kick Off Center to Counter ‘Hybrid’ Threats,” Reuters, April 11, 2017. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 39 Jen Judson, “Countering ‘Little Green Men’: Pentagon Special Ops Studies Russia ‘Gray Zone’ Conflict,” Defense News, May 15, 2017. Peter Kreko and Lorant Gyori, From Russia with Hate: The Kremlin’s Support for Violent Extremism in Central Europe, Atlantic Council, May 17, 2017. Molly K. McKew, “Forget Comey: The Real Story Is Russia’s War on America,” Politico, June 11, 2017. Ben Schreckinger, “How Russia Targets the U.S. Military,” Politico, June 12, 2017. Van Jackson, “Tactics of Strategic Competition,” Naval War College Review, Summer 2017: 39-61. James J. Wirtz, “Life in the ‘Gray Zone’: Observations for Contemporary Strategists,” Defense & Security Analysis, vol. 33, no. 2, 2017: 106-114. Citations from July 2017 through December 2017 Daniel Calingaert, “How Dictators Use Our Open Society Against Us,” The Hill, July 6, 2017. Christopher Walker, “A New Era of Competition, The Growing Threat from Authoritarian Internationalism as a Global Challenge to Democracy,” International Reports, Issue 2, 2017 (July 13, 2017): 16-25. Maxim Eristavi, Why the US Keeps Losing the Fight Against Disinformation, Atlantic Council, July 24, 2017. Anne Applebaum, “Maybe the A.I. Dystopia Is Already Here,” Washington Post, July 28, 2017. Sean Illing, “China Is Perfecting A New Method for Suppressing Dissent on the Internet,” Vox, August 2, 2017. Jim Rutenberg, “RT, Sputnik and Russia’s New Theory of War,” New York Times, September 13, 2017. Susan Landau, “Russia’s Hybrid Warriors Got the White House. Now They’re Coming for America’s Town Halls,” Foreign Policy, September 26, 2017. Karina Orlova, “Make America Vigilant Again,” American Interest, September 29, 2017. Patrick M. Cronin and Harry Krejsa, “5 Ways America Can Defends Itself from ‘Nonphysical’ Attacks,” National Interest, October 3, 2017. “Baltics Battle Russia in Online Disinformation War,” Deutsche Welle (DW), October 8, 2017. Reid Standish, “Russia’s Neighbors Respond to Putin’s ‘Hybrid War,’” Foreign Policy, October 12, 2017. Max Boot, “Russia Has Invented Social Media Blitzkrieg,” Foreign Policy, October 13, 2017. David Ignatius, “Russia Is Pushing to Control Cyberspace. We Should All Be Worried,” Washington Post, October 24, 2017. Patrick Tucker, “How NATO Is Preparing to Fight Tomorrow’s Information Wars,” Defense One, October 26, 2017. Dan Lamothe, “In Finland, Mattis Backs Creation of a Hybrid Warfare Center Focused on Russia,” Washington Post, November 6, 2017. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 40 Citations from January 2018 through June 2018 David Ignatius, “Russia’s Radical New Strategy for Information Warfare,” Washington Post, January 18, 2018. Reid Standish, “Inside a European Center to Combat Russia’s Hybrid Warfare,” Foreign Policy, January 18, 2018. Ihor Kabanenko, “Russian ‘Hybrid War’ Tactics at Sea: Targeting Underwater Communications Cables,” Eurasia Daily Monitor, January 23, 2018. Joshua Stowell, “What is Hybrid Warfare?” Global Security Review, February 2, 2018. Mark Pomerleau, “Why DoD Leaders Are Increasingly Worried About the ‘Gray Zone,’” C4ISRNet, February 5, 2018. Dan Mahaffee, “We’ve Lost the Opening Info Battle against Russia; Let’s Not Lose the War,” Defense One, February 23, 2018. Max Boot, “Russia’s Been Waging War on the West for Years. We Just Haven’t Noticed,” Washington Post, March 15, 2018. Chris Meserole and Alina Polyakova, “Disinformation Wars,” Foreign Policy, May 25, 2018. Max Boot, “The United States Is Preparing for the Wrong War,” Washington Post, March 29, 2018. Giorgi Menabde, “Russia Employs New ‘Hybrid War’ Methods Against Georgia,” Eurasia Daily Monitor, March 29, 2018. Abigail Tracy, “‘A Different Kind of Propaganda’: Has America Lost the Information War,” Vanity Fair, April 23, 2018. Hal Brands, “Putin Is Playing With Fire and We All May Get Burned,” Bloomberg, May 8, 2018. John Grady, “Panel: U.S. Needs Non-Military Options to Handle ‘Gray Zone’ Warfare from Russia, China, Iran,” USNI News, May 15, 2018. Jed Willard, “What Europe Can Teach America About Russian Disinformation,” Atlantic, June 9, 2018. Janusz Bugajski, Moscow’s Anti-Western Social Offensive, Center for European Policy Analysis, June 13, 2018. Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “Russia, China Are Outmaneuvering US: Generals Recommend New Authorities, Doctrine,” Breaking Defense, June 15, 2018. Citations from July 2018 Nicole Ng and Eugene Rumer, “The West Fears Russia’s Hybrid Warfare. They’re Missing the Bigger Picture.” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, July 3, 2019. Joe Pappalardo, “Now NATO Says Russian ‘Hybrid Warfare’ Could Start a Real War,” Popular Mechanics, July 13, 2018. Richard A. Bitzinger, “Russia’s Trump Card: Hybrid Warfare,” Asia Times, July 18, 2018. Nathan Freier, The Darker Shade of Gray: A New War Unlike Any Other, Center for Strategic and International Studies, July 27, 2018. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 41 Stanislaw Zaryn, “Russia’s Hybrid Warfare Toolkit Has More to Offer Than Propaganda,” Defense News, August 9, 2019. Andrew Chuter, “NATO to Define Plan to Counter Russia’s Hybrid Warfare Tactics,” Defense News, December 3, 2019. Donald Stoker and Craig Whiteside, “Blurred Lines: Gray-Zone Conflict and Hybrid War—Two Failures of American Strategic Thinking,” Naval War College Review, Winter 2020. Robert C. Rubel, “Canary In The Coal Mine: The US Navy’s Dilemmas As An Indication Of A Culminating Point In National Grand Strategy,” Journal of Political Risk, April 2020. Hal Brands, “Don’t Let Great Powers Carve Up the World, Spheres of Influence Are Unnecessary and Dangerous,” Foreign Affairs, April 20, 2020. By Daniel W. Drezner, Ronald R. Krebs, and Randall Schweller, “The End of Grand Strategy, America Must Think Small,” Foreign Affairs, May/June 2020. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 42 Appendix E. Congress and the Late 1980s/Early 1990s Shift to Post-Cold War Era This appendix provides additional background information on the role of Congress in responding to the previous change in the international security environment—the shift in the late 1980s and early 1990s from the Cold War to the post-Cold War era. As noted earlier, this shift prompted a broad reassessment by the DOD and Congress of defense funding levels, strategy, and missions that led to numerous changes in DOD plans and programs. Many of these changes were articulated in the 1993 Bottom-Up Review (BUR),73 a reassessment of U.S. defense plans and programs whose very name conveyed the fundamental nature of the reexamination that had occurred.74 In general, the BUR reshaped the U.S. military into a force that was smaller than the Cold War U.S. military, and oriented toward a planning scenario being able to conduct two major regional contingencies (MRCs) rather than the Cold War planning scenario of a NATO-Warsaw Pact conflict.75 Through both committee activities and the efforts of individual Members, Congress played a significant role in the reassessment of defense funding levels, strategy, plans, and programs that was prompted by the end of the Cold War. In terms of committee activities, the question of how to change U.S. defense plans and programs in response to the end of the Cold War was, for example, a major focus for the House and Senate Armed Services Committees in holding hearings and marking up annual national defense authorization acts in the early 1990s.76 73 See Department of Defense, Report on the Bottom-Up Review, Les Aspin, Secretary of Defense, October 1993, 109 pp. 74 Secretary of Defense Les Aspin’s introduction to DOD’s report on the 1993 BUR states In March 1993, I initiated a comprehensive review of the nation’s defense strategy, force structure, modernization, infrastructure, and foundations. I felt that a department-wide review needed to be conducted “from the bottom up” because of the dramatic changes that have occurred in the world as a result of the end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union. These changes in the international security environment have fundamentally altered America’s security needs. Thus, the underlying premise of the Bottom-Up Review was that we needed to reassess all of our defense concepts, plans, and programs from the ground up. (Department of Defense, Report on the Bottom-Up Review, Les Aspin, Secretary of Defense, October 1993, p. iii.) 75 For additional discussion of the results of the BUR, see CRS Report 93-839 F, Defense Department Bottom-Up Review: Results and Issues, October 6, 1993, 6 pp., by Edward F. Bruner, and CRS Report 93-627 F, Defense Department Bottom-Up Review: The Process, July 2, 1993, 9 pp., by Cedric W. Tarr Jr. (both nondistributable and available to congressional clients from the author of this report). 76 See, for example, the following: the House Armed Services Committee’s report on the FY1991 National Defense Authorization Act (H.Rept. 101-665 of August 3, 1990, on H.R. 4739), pp. 7-14; the Senate Armed Services Committee’s report on the FY1991 National Defense Authorization Act (S.Rept. 101-384 of July 20 (legislative day, July 10), 1990, on S. 2884), pp. 8-36; the House Armed Services Committee’s report on the FY1992 and FY1993 National Defense Authorization Act (H.Rept. 102-60 of May 13, 1991, on H.R. 2100), pp. 8 and 13; the Senate Armed Services Committee’s report on the FY1992 and FY1993 National Defense Authorization Act (S.Rept. 102-113 of July 19 (legislative day, July 8), 1991, on S. 1507), pp. 8-9; the House Armed Services Committee’s report on the FY1993 National Defense Authorization Act (H.Rept. 102-527 of May 19, 1992, on H.R. 5006), pp. 8-10, 14-15, and 22; the Senate Armed Services Committee’s report on the FY1993 National Defense Authorization Act Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service 43 In terms of efforts by individual Members, some Members put forth their own proposals for how much to reduce defense spending from the levels of the final years of the Cold War,77 while others put forth detailed proposals for future U.S. defense strategy, plans, programs, and spending. Senator John McCain, for example, issued a detailed, 32-page policy paper in November 1991 presenting his proposals for defense spending, missions, force structure, and weapon acquisition programs.78 Perhaps the most extensive individual effort by a Member to participate in the reassessment of U.S. defense following the end of the Cold War was the one carried out by Representative Les Aspin, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee. In early 1992, Aspin, supported by members of the committee’s staff, devised a force-sizing construct and potential force levels and associated defense spending levels U.S. defense for the new post-Cold War era. A principal aim of Aspin’s effort was to create an alternative to the “Base Force” plan for U.S. defense in the post-Cold War era that had been developed by the George H. W. Bush Administration.79 Aspin’s effort included a series of policy papers in January and February 199280 that were augmented by press releases and speeches. Aspin’s policy paper of February 25, 1992, served as the basis for his testimony that same day at a hearing on future defense spending before the House Budget Committee. Although DOD and some other observers (including some Members of Congress) (S.Rept. 102-352 of July 31 (legislative day, July 23), 1992, on S. 3114), pp. 7-12; the House Armed Services Committee’s report on the FY1994 National Defense Authorization Act (H.Rept. 103-200 of July 30, 1993, on H.R. 2401), pp. 8-9 and 18-19; the House Armed Services Committee’s report on the FY1995 National Defense Authorization Act (H.Rept. 103-499 of May 10, 1994, on H.R. 4301), pp. 7 and 9; the Senate Armed Services Committee’s report on the FY1995 National Defense Authorization Act (S.Rept. 103-282 of June 14 (legislative day, June 7), 1994, on S. 2182), pp. 8-9; and the House Armed Services Committee’s report on the FY1996 National Defense Authorization Act (H.Rept. 104-131 of June 1, 1995, on H.R. 1530), pp. 6-7 and 11-12. 77 See, for example, Clifford Krauss, “New Proposal for Military Cut,” New York Times, January 7, 1992: A11 (discussing a proposal by Senator Phil Gramm for reducing defense spending by a certain amount); “Sen. Mitchell Proposes $100 Billion Cut in Defense,” Aerospace Daily, January 17, 1992: 87; John Lancaster, “Nunn Proposes 5-Year Defense Cut of $85 Billion,” Washington Post, March 25, 1992: A4. 78 Senator John McCain, Matching A Peace Dividend With National Security, A New Strategy For The 1990s, November 1991, 32 pp. 79 See, for example, “Arms Panel Chief Challenges Ending Use of Threat Analysis,” Aviation Week & Space Technology, January 13, 1992: 28; Patrick E. Tyler, “Top Congressman Seeks Deeper Cuts in Military Budget,” New York Times, February 23, 1991: 1; Barton Gellman, “Debate on Military’s Future Crystallizes Around ‘Enemies List,’” Washington Post, February 26, 1992: A20; Pat Towell, “Planning the Nation’s Defense,” CQ, February 29, 1992: 479. For more on the Base Force, see CRS Report 92-493 S, National Military Strategy, The DoD Base Force, and U.S. Unified Command Plan, June 11, 1992, 68 pp., by John M. Collins (nondistributable and available to congressional clients from the author of this report). 80 These policy papers included the following:  National Security in the 1990s: Defining a New Basis for U.S. Military Forces, Rep. Les Aspin, Chairman, House Armed Services Committee, Before the Atlantic Council of the United States, January 6, 1992, 23 pp.;  An Approach to Sizing American Conventional Forces For the Post-Soviet Era, Rep. Les Aspin, Chairman, House Armed Services Committee, January 24, 2991, 20 pp.;  Tomorrow’s Defense From Today’s Industrial Base: Finding the Right Resource Strategy For A New Era, by Rep. Les Aspin, Chairman, House Armed Services Committee, Before the American Defense Preparedness Association, February 12, 1992, 20 pp.; and  An Approach to Sizing American Conventional Forces For the Post-Soviet Era, Four Illustrative Options, Rep. Les Aspin, Chairman, House Armed Services Committee, February 25, 1992, 27 pp. Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for Congress Congressional Research Service R43838 · VERSION 58 · UPDATED 44 criticized Aspin’s analysis and proposals on various grounds,81 the effort arguably proved consequential the following year, when Aspin became Secretary of Defense in the new Clinton Administration. Aspin’s 1992 effort helped inform his participation in DOD’s 1993 BUR. The 1993 BUR in turn created a precedent for the subsequent Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) process (renamed Defense Strategy Review in 2015) that remained in place until 2016. Author Information Ronald O'Rourke Specialist in Naval Affairs Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 81 See, for example, “Aspin Defense Budget Plans Rebuffed By Committee,” Defense Daily, February 24, 1992: 289; “Pentagon Spurns Aspin’s Budget Cuts as ‘Political,’” Washington Post, February 28, 1992: A14. 		2020-05-07T16:05:07-0400
Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Updated May 4, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov RL32572 Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service Summary Recent debates about U.S. nuclear weapons have questioned what role weapons with shorter ranges and lower yields can play in addressing emerging threats in Europe and Asia. These weapons, often referred to as nonstrategic nuclear weapons, have not been limited by past U.S.-Russian arms control agreements. Some analysts argue such limits would be of value, particularly in addressing Russia’s greater numbers of these types of weapons. Others have argued that the United States should expand its deployments of these weapons, in both Europe and Asia, to address new risks of war conducted under a nuclear shadow. The Trump Administration addressed these questions in the Nuclear Posture Review released in February 2018, and determined that the United States should acquire two new types of nuclear weapons: a new low-yield warhead for submarine-launched ballistic missiles and a new sea-launched cruise missile. During the Cold War, the United States and Soviet Union both deployed nonstrategic nuclear weapons for use in the field during a conflict. While there are several ways to distinguish between strategic and nonstrategic nuclear weapons, most analysts consider nonstrategic weapons to be shorter-range delivery systems with lower-yield warheads that might attack troops or facilities on the battlefield. They have included nuclear mines; artillery; short-, medium-, and long-range ballistic missiles; cruise missiles; and gravity bombs. In contrast with the longer-range “strategic” nuclear weapons, these weapons had a lower profile in policy debates and arms control negotiations, possibly because they did not pose a direct threat to the continental United States. At the end of the 1980s, each nation still had thousands of these weapons deployed with their troops in the field, aboard naval vessels, and on aircraft. In 1991, the United States and Soviet Union both withdrew from deployment most and eliminated from their arsenals many of their nonstrategic nuclear weapons. The United States now has approximately 500 nonstrategic nuclear weapons, with around 200 deployed with aircraft in Europe and the remaining stored in the United States. Estimates vary, but experts believe Russia still has between 1,000 and 6,000 warheads for nonstrategic nuclear weapons in its arsenal. The Bush Administration quietly redeployed some U.S. weapons deployed in Europe, while the Obama Administration retired older sea-launched cruise missiles. Russia, however seems to have increased its reliance on nuclear weapons in its national security concept. Analysts have identified a number of issues with the continued deployment of U.S. and Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons. In the past, these have included questions about the safety and security of Russia’s weapons and the possibility that some might be lost, stolen, or sold to another nation or group. These issues still include questions about the role of these weapons in U.S. and Russian security policy; questions about the role that these weapons play in NATO policy and whether there is a continuing need for the United States to deploy them at bases overseas; questions about the implications of the disparity in numbers between U.S. and Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons; and questions about the relationship between nonstrategic nuclear weapons and U.S. nonproliferation policy. Some argue that these weapons do not create any problems and the United States should not alter its policy. Others argue that the United States should expand its deployments of these weapons in response to challenges from Russia, China, and North Korea. Some believe the United States should reduce its reliance on these weapons and encourage Russia to do the same. Many have suggested that the United States and Russia expand efforts to cooperate on ensuring the safe and secure storage and elimination of these weapons; others have suggested that they negotiate an arms control treaty that would limit these weapons and allow for increased transparency in monitoring their deployment and elimination. The 116th Congress may review some of these proposals. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 Background ..................................................................................................................................... 2 The Distinction Between Strategic and Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons ......................................... 7 Definition by Observable Capabilities ................................................................................ 8 Definition by Exclusion ...................................................................................................... 9 Hybrid Definitions .............................................................................................................. 9 U.S. and Soviet Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons ........................................................................... 10 U.S. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons During the Cold War ..................................................... 10 Strategy and Doctrine ....................................................................................................... 10 Force Structure ................................................................................................................... 11 Soviet Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons During the Cold War ................................................... 11 Strategy and Doctrine ........................................................................................................ 11 Force Structure .................................................................................................................. 12 The 1991 Presidential Nuclear Initiatives ............................................................................... 12 U.S. Initiative .................................................................................................................... 12 Soviet and Russian Initiatives ........................................................................................... 13 U.S. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons after the Cold War ......................................................... 14 Strategy and Doctrine ....................................................................................................... 14 Force Structure .................................................................................................................. 21 Russian Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons after the Cold War ................................................... 23 Strategy and Doctrine ....................................................................................................... 23 Force Structure .................................................................................................................. 26 Changing the Focus of the Debate .......................................................................................... 29 Issues for Congress ........................................................................................................................ 30 Safety and Security of Russian Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons ............................................. 30 The Role of Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons in Russia’s National Security Policy ................ 31 The Role of Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons in U.S. National Security Policy ....................... 32 The Role of Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons in NATO Policy and Alliance Strategy ............. 34 The Relationship Between Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons and U.S. Nonproliferation Policy ................................................................................................................................... 36 Arms Control Options ............................................................................................................. 37 Increase Transparency ....................................................................................................... 38 Negotiate a Formal Treaty ................................................................................................ 38 Prospects for Arms Control ............................................................................................... 40 Contacts Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 42 Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction The Trump Administration’s Nuclear Posture Review (NPR), released on February 2, 2018, includes plans for the United States to deploy two new types of nuclear weapons “to enhance the flexibility and responsiveness of U.S. nuclear forces.”1 These include a new low-yield nuclear warhead deployed on U.S. long-range, strategic submarine-launched ballistic missiles2 and a new nonstrategic sea-launched cruise missile that the Navy could deploy on Navy ships or attack submarines. The NPR highlights that these weapons represent a response to Russia’s deployment of a much larger stockpile of lower-yield nonstrategic nuclear weapons and to Russia’s apparent belief “that limited nuclear first use, potentially including low yield weapons” can provide “a coercive advantage in crises and at lower levels of conflict.” The NPR stated that the United States did not need to deploy “non-strategic nuclear capabilities that quantitatively match or mimic Russia’s more expansive arsenal,” but indicated that “expanding flexible U.S. nuclear options now, to include low yield options, is important for the preservation of credible deterrence against regional aggression.” The NPR’s recommended deployment of U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons follows growing concerns, both in Congress and among analysts outside of government, about new nuclear challenges facing the United States. Specifically, some have called for the deployment of greater numbers and/or types of U.S. nuclear weapons in Europe in response to Russia’s continuing aggression in Ukraine and its apparent increased reliance on nuclear weapons3 and in Asia, in response to challenges from China and North Korea. Others, however, have argued the deployment of more nuclear weapons would do little to enhance U.S. and allied security and that NATO, in particular, would be better served by enhancing its conventional capabilities.4 This interest in possible new deployments of U.S. nonstrategic, or shorter-range, nuclear weapons differs sharply from previous years, when Members of Congress, while concerned about Russia’s larger stockpile of such weapons, seemed more interested in limiting these weapons through arms control than expanding U.S. deployments. During the Senate debate on the 2010 U.S.-Russian Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (New START), many Members noted that this treaty did not impose any limits on nonstrategic nuclear weapons and that Russia possessed a far greater number of these systems than did the United States. Some expressed particular concerns about the threat that Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons might pose to U.S. allies in Europe; others argued that these weapons might be vulnerable to theft or sale to nations or groups seeking their own nuclear weapons. The Senate, in its Resolution of Ratification on New START, stated that the United States should seek to initiate within one year, “negotiations with the Russian Federation on an agreement to address the disparity between the non-strategic (tactical) nuclear weapons stockpiles of the Russian Federation and of the United States and to secure and reduce 1 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, pp. 52-53, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. 2 For details, see CRS In Focus IF11143, A Low-Yield, Submarine-Launched Nuclear Warhead: Overview of the Expert Debate, by Amy F. Woolf. 3 Matthew Kroenig, The Renewed Russian Nuclear Threat and NATO Nuclear Deterrence Posture, The Atlantic Council, Issue Brief, Washington, DC, February 2016, http://www.atlanticcouncil.org/images/publications/Russian_Nuclear_Threat_0203_web.pdf. 4 Steven Pifer, “Russia’s Rising Military: Should the U.S. Send More Nuclear Weapons to Europe?,” The National Interest, July 21, 2015. http://nationalinterest.org/feature/russias-rising-military-should-the-us-send-more-nuclear-13381. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 2 tactical nuclear weapons in a verifiable manner.”5 In addition, in the FY2013 Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 4310, §1037), Congress again indicated that “the United States should pursue negotiations with the Russian Federation aimed at the reduction of Russian deployed and nondeployed nonstrategic nuclear forces.” The United States did raise the issue of negotiations on nonstrategic nuclear weapons with Russia within the year after New START entered into force, but the two nations have not moved forward with efforts to negotiate limits on these weapons. Russia has expressed little interest in such a negotiation, and has stated that it will not even begin the process until the United States removes its nonstrategic nuclear weapons from bases in Europe. According to U.S. officials, the United States and NATO tried for several years to identify and evaluate possible transparency measures and limits that might apply to these weapons. The issue remains on the arms control agenda. Press reports from April 2019 indicate that President Trump has tasked his staff with developing a new approach to arms control that would capture all types of nuclear weapons, including the nonstrategic nuclear weapons omitted from New START.6 There is little evidence that Russia has changed its views; it has not directly rejected talks on nonstrategic nuclear weapons, but continues to insist that a broader treaty framework address its concerns with U.S. capabilities as well as U.S. concerns with its forces. This report provides basic information about U.S. and Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons. It begins with a brief discussion of how these weapons have appeared in public debates in the past few decades, then summarizes the differences between strategic and nonstrategic nuclear weapons. It then provides some historical background, describing the numbers and types of nonstrategic nuclear weapons deployed by both nations during the Cold War and in the past decade; the policies that guided the deployment and prospective use of these weapons; measures that the two sides have taken to reduce and contain their forces, and the 2018 NPR’s recommendation for the deployment of new U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons. The report reviews the issues that have been raised with regard to U.S. and Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons, and summarizes a number of policy options that might be explored by Congress, the United States, Russia, and other nations to address these issues. Background During the Cold War, nuclear weapons were central to the U.S. strategy of deterring Soviet aggression against the United States and U.S. allies. Toward this end, the United States deployed a wide variety of systems that could carry nuclear warheads. These included nuclear mines; artillery; short-, medium-, and long-range ballistic missiles; cruise missiles; and gravity bombs. The United States deployed these weapons with its troops in the field, aboard aircraft, on surface ships, on submarines, and in fixed, land-based launchers. The United States articulated a complex strategy, and developed detailed operational plans, that would guide the use of these weapons in the event of a conflict with the Soviet Union and its allies. Most public discussions about U.S. and Soviet nuclear weapons—including discussions about perceived imbalances between the two nations’ forces and discussions about the possible use of arms control measures to reduce the risk of nuclear war and limit or reduce the numbers of 5 The full text of the Resolution of Ratification can be found on page S10982 of the Congressional Record from December 22, 2010, http://www.congress.gov/cgi-lis/query/z?r111:S22DE0-0012. 6 Paul Sonne and John Hudson, “Trump orders staff to prepare arms-control push with Russia and China,” Washington Post, April 25, 2019, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/trump-orders-staff-to-prepare-arms-control-push-with-russia-and-china/2019/04/25/c7f05e04-6076-11e9-9412-daf3d2e67c6d_story.html?utm_term=.3e294ce0a8e9. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 3 nuclear weapons—focused on long-range, or strategic, nuclear weapons. These include long-range land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs), and heavy bombers that carry cruise missiles or gravity bombs. These were the weapons that the United States and Soviet Union deployed so that they could threaten destruction of central military, industrial, and leadership facilities in the other country—the weapons of global nuclear war. But both nations also deployed thousands of nuclear weapons outside their own territories with their troops in the field. These weapons usually had less explosive power and were deployed with launchers that would deliver them across shorter ranges than strategic nuclear weapons. They were intended for use by troops on the battlefield or within the theater of battle to achieve more limited, or tactical, objectives. These “nonstrategic” nuclear weapons did not completely escape public discussion or arms control debates. Their profile rose in the early 1980s when U.S. plans to deploy new cruise missiles and intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Europe, as a part of NATO’s nuclear strategy, ignited large public protests in many NATO nations. Their high profile returned later in the decade when the United States and Soviet Union signed the 1987 Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty and eliminated medium- and intermediate-range ballistic and cruise missiles. Then, in 1991, President George Bush and Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev each announced that they would withdraw from deployment most of their nonstrategic nuclear weapons and eliminate many of them. These 1991 announcements, coming after the abortive coup in Moscow in August 1991, but months before the December 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union, responded to growing concerns about the safety and security of Soviet nuclear weapons at a time of growing political and economic upheaval in that nation. They also allowed the United States to alter its forces in response to easing tensions and the changing international security environment. Consequently, for many in the general public, these initiatives appeared to resolve the problems associated with nonstrategic nuclear weapons. As a result, although the United States and Russia included these weapons in some of their arms control discussions, most of their arms control efforts during the rest of that decade focused on strategic weapons, with efforts made to implement the 1991 Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) and negotiate deeper reductions in strategic nuclear weapons. The lack of public attention did not, however, reflect a total absence of questions or concerns about nonstrategic nuclear weapons. In 1997, President Clinton and Russia’s President Boris Yeltsin signed a framework agreement that stated they would address measures related to nonstrategic nuclear weapons in a potential START III Treaty. Further, during the 1990s, outside analysts, officials in the U.S. government, and many Members of Congress raised continuing questions about the safety and security of Russia’s remaining nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Congress sought a more detailed accounting of Russia’s weapons in legislation passed in the late 1990s. Analysts also questioned the role that these weapons might play in Russia’s evolving national security strategy, the rationale for their continued deployment in the U.S. nuclear arsenal, and their relationship to U.S. nuclear nonproliferation policy. The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, also reminded people of the catastrophic consequences that might ensue if terrorists were to acquire and use nuclear weapons, with continuing attention focused on the potentially insecure stock of Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons. The George W. Bush Administration did not adopt an explicit policy of reducing or eliminating nonstrategic nuclear weapons. When it announced the results of its Nuclear Posture Review (NPR) in early 2002, it did not outline any changes to the U.S. deployment of nonstrategic nuclear weapons at bases in Europe; it stated that NATO would address the future of those weapons. Although there was little public discussion of this issue during the Bush Administration, Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 4 reports indicate that the United States did redeploy and withdraw some of its nonstrategic nuclear weapons from bases in Europe.7 It made these changes quietly and unilaterally, in response to U.S. and NATO security requirements, without requesting or requiring reciprocity from Russia. The Bush Administration also did not discuss these weapons with Russia during arms control negotiations in 2002. Instead, the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty (Moscow Treaty), signed in June 2002, limited only the number of operationally deployed warheads on strategic nuclear weapons. When asked about the absence of these weapons in the Moscow Treaty, then-Secretary of State Colin Powell noted that the treaty was not intended to address these weapons, although the parties could address questions about the safety and security of these weapons during less formal discussions.8 These discussions, however, never occurred. Nevertheless, Congress remained concerned about the potential risks associated with Russia’s continuing deployment of nonstrategic nuclear weapons. The FY2006 Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 109-163) contained two provisions that called for further study on these weapons. Section 1212 mandated that the Secretary of Defense submit a report that would determine whether increased transparency and further reductions in U.S. and Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons were in the U.S. national security interest; Section 3115 called on the Secretary of Energy to submit a report on what steps the United States might take to bring about progress in improving the accounting for and security of Russia’s nonstrategic nuclear weapons. In the 109th Congress, H.R. 5017, a bill to ensure implementation of the 9/11 Commission Report recommendations, included a provision (§334) that called on the Secretary of Defense to submit a report that detailed U.S. efforts to encourage Russia to provide a detailed accounting of its force of nonstrategic nuclear weapons. It also would have authorized $5 million for the United States to assist Russia in completing an inventory of these weapons. The 109th Congress did not address this bill or its components in any detail. In the 110th Congress, H.R. 1 sought to ensure the implementation of the 9/11 Commission Report recommendations. However, in its final form (P.L. 110-53), it did not include any references to Russia’s nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Several events since 2007 have served to elevate the profile of nonstrategic nuclear weapons in debates about the future of U.S. nuclear weapons and arms control policy. First, in January 2007, four senior statesmen published an article in the Wall Street Journal that highlighted the continuing threat posed by the existence, and proliferation, of nuclear weapons.9 They called on leaders in nations with nuclear weapons to adopt the goal of seeking a world free of nuclear weapons. After acknowledging that that this was a long-term enterprise, they identified a number of urgent, near-term steps that these nations might take. They included among these steps a call for nations to eliminate “short-range nuclear weapons designed to be forward-deployed.” In a subsequent article published in January 2008, they elaborated on this step, calling for “a dialogue, including within NATO and with Russia, on consolidating the nuclear weapons designed for forward deployment to enhance their security, as a first step toward careful accounting for them and their eventual elimination.” They noted, specifically, that “these smaller and more portable nuclear weapons are, given their characteristics, inviting acquisition targets for terrorist groups.”10 7 Robert S. Norris and Hans M. Kristensen, “U.S. Tactical Nuclear Weapons in Europe, 2011,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, January 2011, http://bos.sagepub.com/content/67/1/64.full. 8 U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, Treaty on Strategic Offensive Reductions: The Moscow Treaty, Hearings, 107th Cong., Second sess., July and September 2002, S. Hrg. 107-622 (Washington: GPO, 2002), p. 12. 9 George P. Shultz, William J. Perry, Henry A. Kissinger, and Sam Nunn, “A World Free of Nuclear Weapons,” Wall Street Journal, January 4, 2007, p. A15. 10 George P. Shultz, William J. Perry, Henry A. Kissinger, and Sam Nunn, “Toward a Nuclear-Free World,” Wall Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 5 Second, as a part of its renewed interest in the role of nuclear weapons in U.S. national security strategy, Congress established, in the FY2008 Defense Authorization Bill (P.L. 110-181 §1062), a Congressional Commission on the Strategic Posture of the United States. The Congressional Commission, which issued its report in April 2009, briefly addressed the role of nonstrategic nuclear weapons in U.S. national security strategy and noted that these weapons can help the United States assure its allies of the U.S. commitment to their security. It also noted concerns about the imbalance in the numbers of U.S. and Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons and mentioned that Russia had increased its reliance on these weapons to compensate for weaknesses in its conventional forces.11 The 110th Congress also mandated (P.L. 110-181, §1070) that the next Administration conduct a new Nuclear Posture Review (NPR). The Obama Administration completed this NPR in early April 2010. This study identified a number of steps the United States would take to reduce the roles and numbers of nuclear weapons in the U.S. arsenal. A few of these steps, including the planned retirement of nuclear-armed, sea-launched cruise missiles, affected U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons. At the same time, though, the NPR recognized the role that U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons play in assuring U.S. allies of the U.S. commitment to their security. It indicated that the United States would “retain the capability to forward-deploy U.S. nuclear weapons on tactical fighter-bombers” and that the United States would seek to “expand consultations with allies and partners to address how to ensure the credibility and effectiveness of the U.S. extended deterrent. No changes in U.S. extended deterrence capabilities will be made without close consultations with our allies and partners.”12 Discussions about the presence of U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons at bases in Europe and their role in NATO’s strategy also increased in 2009 and 2010 during the drafting of NATO’s strategic concept.13 Officials in some NATO nations called for the removal of U.S. nonstrategic weapons from bases on the continent, noting that they had no military significance for NATO’s security. Others called for the retention of these weapons, arguing that they played a political role in NATO, with shared rights and responsibilities, and that they helped balance Russia’s deployment of greater numbers of nonstrategic nuclear weapons. When it was published, the 2010 Strategic Concept did not call for the removal of U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons. It stated that “deterrence, based on an appropriate mix of nuclear and conventional capabilities, remains a core element of our overall strategy.” It also indicated that “the circumstances in which any use of nuclear weapons might have to be contemplated are extremely remote,” but indicated that “as long as nuclear weapons exist, NATO will remain a nuclear alliance.” It then concluded that NATO would “maintain an appropriate mix of nuclear and conventional forces.”14 NATO nations continue to share responsibility for basing and delivery of the weapons and would weigh in on decisions about their possible use. Street Journal, January 15, 2008, p. A13. 11 William J. Perry, Chairman and James R. Schlesinger, Vice Chairman, America’s Strategic Posture, The Final Report of the Congressional Commission on the Strategic Posture of the United States, Washington, DC, April 2009, pp. 12-13, 21. https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/file/strat_posture_report_adv_copy.pdf. 12 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, April 6, 2010, pp. 26-27, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/features/defenseReviews/NPR/2010_Nuclear_Posture_Review_Report.pdf. 13 NATO released this document in November 2010. 14 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Active Engagement, Modern Defence, Strategic Concept For the Defence and Security of The Members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Lisbon, Portugal, November 29, 2010, pp. 4-5, http://www.nato.int/lisbon2010/strategic-concept-2010-eng.pdf. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 6 NATO recognized that the Strategic Concept would not be the last word on the role or presence of nonstrategic nuclear weapons in NATO. In the declaration released at the conclusion of the November 2010 Lisbon Summit, the allies agreed that they would continue to review NATO’s overall posture in deterring and defending against the full range of threats to the Alliance. They commissioned a comprehensive Deterrence and Defense Posture Review (DDPR) that would examine the range of capabilities required for defense and deterrence, including nuclear weapons, missile defense, and other means of strategic deterrence and defense.15 The DDPR was presented at the May 2012 NATO summit in Chicago. It did not, however, recommend any changes in NATO’s nuclear posture. Instead, it noted that “nuclear weapons are a core component of NATO’s overall capabilities for deterrence and defence,” and that “the Alliance’s nuclear force posture currently meets the criteria for an effective deterrence and defence posture.”16 NATO reaffirmed this conclusion after its summit in Wales in September 2014, noting that “deterrence, based on an appropriate mix of nuclear, conventional, and missile defence capabilities, remains a core element of our overall strategy.”17 NATO addressed this issue again during its summit in Warsaw in July 2016, and did not alter this conclusion about the value of nuclear weapons to the alliance. Moreover, although the alliance did not call for the deployment of additional nuclear weapons in Europe, the communique released at the end of the summit highlighted the continuing importance of U.S. nuclear weapons deployed in Europe and the nuclear sharing arrangements among the allies. Specifically, the allies reiterated that “as long as nuclear weapons exist, NATO will remain a nuclear alliance” and that “the strategic forces of the Alliance, particularly those of the United States, are the supreme guarantee of the security of the Allies.” At the same time, they noted that “NATO’s nuclear deterrence posture also relies, in part, on United States’ nuclear weapons forward-deployed in Europe and on capabilities and infrastructure provided by Allies concerned.”18 At the same time, NATO began to implement numerous initiatives in response to Russia’s aggression in Ukraine and aggressive posture toward Europe. While some of these initiatives may strengthen NATO’s planning and exercise capabilities, they are unlikely to result in changes in the numbers of deployed nuclear weapons.19 The 2018 Nuclear Posture Review echoed many of the themes highlighted in documents published in the past decade. Like the Strategic Posture Commission Report published in 2009, the NPR highlighted the imbalance in the numbers of U.S. and Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons and stated that Russia had increased its reliance on these weapons in its national security strategy.20 It argued that Russia believed it could use these weapons to coerce the United States 15 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Lisbon Summit Declaration, Lisbon, Portugal, November 20, 2010, http://www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/official_texts_68828.htm. 16 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Deterrence and Defense Posture Review, Press Release, Chicago, IL, May 20, 2012, http://www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/official_texts_87597.htm?mode=pressrelease. 17 North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Wales Summit Declaration, September 5, 2014, http://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/official_texts_112964.htm?selectedLocale=en. 18 North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Warsaw Summit Communique, Warsaw, Poland, July 9, 2016, para. 53, http://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/official_texts_133169.htm?selectedLocale=en. 19 James Stravridis, “Are We Entering a New Cold War?,” Foreign Policy, February 17, 2016, http://foreignpolicy.com/2016/02/17/are-we-entering-a-new-cold-war-russia-europe/. See also Aaron Mehta, “At NATO, A Focus on Modern Deterrence,” Defense News, February 10, 2016, http://www.defensenews.com/story/defense/international/europe/2016/02/10/nato-focus-modern-deterrence/80164930/. 20 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, D.C., February 2, 2018, pp. 52-53, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 7 and its NATO allies to back down during a conventional conflict in Europe.21 The 2018 NPR also echoed the Obama Administration’s NPR, indicating that the United States would maintain “the capability to forward deploy nuclear bombers and DCA around the world.” It also stated that the United States would continue Obama-era programs to communicate with and consult allies “on policy, strategy and capabilities.”22 The 2018 NPR also supported recent changes in NATO’s approach to nuclear modernization and planning, indicating that the United States is “committed to upgrading DCA [dual capable aircraft] with the nuclear-capable F-35 aircraft” and that the United States would “work with NATO to best ensure—and improve where needed—the readiness, survivability, and operational effectiveness of DCA based in Europe.”23 However, while the 2010 NPR called for the retirement of U.S. Tomahawk nuclear-armed sea-launched cruise missiles (TLAMN), the 2018 NPR called for the development of a new sea-launched cruise missile (SLCM). The 2010 NPR argued that “this system serves a redundant purpose in the U.S. nuclear stockpile” and, although the United States “remains committed to providing a credible extended deterrence posture and capabilities,” the “deterrence and assurance roles of TLAMN can be adequately substituted by these other means.”24 The 2018 NPR disputed this conclusion. It stated that “the rapid development of a modern SLCM” will address “the increasing need for flexible and low-yield options to strengthen deterrence and assurance” and “will strengthen the effectiveness of the sea-based nuclear deterrence force.”25 The Distinction Between Strategic and Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons The distinction between strategic and nonstrategic (also known as tactical) nuclear weapons reflects the military definitions of, on the one hand, a strategic mission and, on the other hand, the tactical use of nuclear weapons. According to the Department of Defense Dictionary of Military Terms,26 a strategic mission is Directed against one or more of a selected series of enemy targets with the purpose of progressive destruction and disintegration of the enemy’s warmaking capacity and will to make war. Targets include key manufacturing systems, sources of raw material, critical material, stockpiles, power systems, transportation systems, communication facilities, and other such target systems. As opposed to tactical operations, strategic operations are designed to have a long-range rather than immediate effect on the enemy and its military forces. 21 Other analysts dispute this interpretation of Russia’s nuclear doctrine. See, for example, Olya Oliker, Russia’s Nuclear Doctrine; What We Know, What We Don’t, and What That Means, CSIS, Washington, DC, May 5, 2016, https://www.csis.org/analysis/russia%E2%80%99s-nuclear-doctrine. 22 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, p. 35, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. 23 Ibid. p. 36. 24 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, April 6, 2010, p. 28, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/features/defenseReviews/NPR/2010_Nuclear_Posture_Review_Report.pdf. 25 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, p. 55, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. 26 This dictionary and these definitions can be found on the DOD website at http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/jel/doddict/index.html. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 8 In contrast, the tactical use of nuclear weapons is defined as “the use of nuclear weapons by land, sea, or air forces against opposing forces, supporting installations or facilities, in support of operations that contribute to the accomplishment of a military mission of limited scope, or in support of the military commander’s scheme of maneuver, usually limited to the area of military operations.” Definition by Observable Capabilities During the Cold War, it was relatively easy to distinguish between strategic and nonstrategic nuclear weapons because each type had different capabilities that were better suited to the different missions. Definition by Range of Delivery Vehicles The long-range missiles and heavy bombers deployed on U.S. territory and missiles deployed in ballistic missile submarines had the range and destructive power to attack and destroy military, industrial, and leadership targets central to the Soviet Union’s ability to prosecute the war. At the same time, with their large warheads and relatively limited accuracies (at least during the earlier years of the Cold War), these weapons were not suited for attacks associated with tactical or battlefield operations. Nonstrategic nuclear weapons, in contrast, were not suited for strategic missions because they lacked the range to reach targets inside the Soviet Union (or, for Soviet weapons, targets inside the United States). But, because they were often small enough to be deployed with troops in the field or at forward bases, the United States and Soviet Union could have used them to attack targets in the theater of the conflict, or on the battlefield itself, to support more limited military missions. Even during the Cold War, however, the United States and Russia deployed nuclear weapons that defied the standard understanding of the difference between strategic and nonstrategic nuclear weapons. For example, both nations considered weapons based on their own territories that could deliver warheads to the territory of the other nation to be “strategic” because they had the range needed to reach targets inside the other nation’s territory. But some early Soviet submarine-launched ballistic missiles had relatively short (i.e., 500 mile) ranges, and the submarines patrolled close to U.S. shores to ensure that the weapons could reach their strategic targets. Conversely, in the 1980s the United States considered sea-launched cruise missiles (SLCMs) deployed on submarines or surface ships to be nonstrategic nuclear weapons. But, if these vessels were deployed close to Soviet borders, these weapons could have destroyed many of the same targets as U.S. strategic nuclear weapons. Similarly, U.S. intermediate-range missiles that were deployed in Europe, which were considered nonstrategic by the United States, could reach central, strategic targets in the Soviet Union. Furthermore, some weapons that had the range to reach “strategic” targets on the territory of the other nations could also deliver tactical nuclear weapons in support of battlefield or tactical operations. Soviet bombers could be equipped with nuclear-armed anti-ship missiles; U.S. bombers could also carry anti-ship weapons and nuclear mines. Hence, the range of the delivery vehicle does not always correlate with the types of targets or objectives associated with the warhead carried on that system. This relationship between range and mission has become even more clouded since the end of the Cold War because the United States and Russia have retired many of the shorter- and medium-range delivery systems considered to be nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Further, both nations could use their longer-range “strategic” systems to deliver warheads to a full range of strategic and tactical targets, even if long-standing traditions and arms control definitions weigh against this change. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 9 Definition by Yield of Warheads During the Cold War, the longer-range strategic delivery vehicles also tended to carry warheads with greater yields, or destructive power, than nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Smaller warheads were better suited to nonstrategic weapons because they sought to achieve more limited, discrete objectives on the battlefield than did the larger, strategic nuclear weapons. But this distinction has also dissolved in more modern systems. Many U.S. and Russian heavy bombers can carry weapons of lower yields, and, as accuracies improved for bombs and missiles, warheads with lower yields could achieve the same expected level of destruction that had required larger warheads in early generations of strategic weapons systems. Definition by Exclusion The observable capabilities that allowed analysts to distinguish between strategic and nonstrategic nuclear weapons during the Cold War have not always been precise, and may not prove to be relevant or appropriate in the future. On the other hand, the “strategic” weapons identified by these capabilities—ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers—are the only systems covered by the limits in strategic offensive arms control agreements—the SALT agreements signed in the 1970s, the START agreements signed in the 1990s, the Moscow Treaty signed in 2002, and the New START Treaty signed in 2010. Consequently, an “easy” dividing line is one that would consider all weapons not covered by strategic arms control treaties as nonstrategic nuclear weapons. This report takes this approach when reviewing the history of U.S. and Soviet/Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons, and in some cases when discussing remaining stocks of nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Hybrid Definitions The definition by exclusion, although the most common form used in recent discussions, may not prove sufficient when discussing current and future issues associated with these weapons. Since the early 1990s, the United States and Russia have withdrawn from deployment most of their nonstrategic nuclear weapons and eliminated many of the shorter- and medium-range launchers for these weapons (these changes are discussed in more detail below). Nevertheless, both nations maintain roles for these weapons in their national security strategies. Russia has enunciated a national security strategy that allows for the possible use of nuclear weapons in regional contingencies and conflicts near the periphery of Russia. The United States also maintains these capabilities in its nuclear arsenal and does not rule out the possibility that it might need them to deter or defeat potential adversaries. Moreover, the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review, with its plans for the deployment new nonstrategic weapons, further complicates efforts to identify a single definition. The sea-launched cruise missile clearly meets several definitions of nonstrategic nuclear weapons—it would not have the long range of a strategic system, it would likely have a relatively low-yield warhead, and it would not count under existing treaties limiting strategic offensive weapons. But a new low-yield warhead for submarine-launched ballistic missiles is more complicated. If yield were the distinguishing characteristic, this might be characterized as a nonstrategic weapon. But the delivery system—a submarine-launched ballistic missile—is clearly a strategic system. However, it has the long range of a strategic delivery vehicle and it is counted within the limits of the New START Treaty. Moreover, missiles with low-yield warheads could be deployed on the same submarines as missiles with higher yield, or strategic, warheads, complicating efforts to distinguish between strategic and nonstrategic SLBMs. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 10 Then-Secretary of Defense James Mattis further complicated the discussion during his testimony before the House Armed Services Committee on February 6, 2018, when he stated that he does not believe “there is any such thing as a tactical nuclear weapon. Any nuclear weapon used any time is a strategic game changer.” He also resisted using the phrase “nonstrategic” to describe U.S. capabilities, and instead referred to the U.S. ability to deliver a “low-yield” response.27 While his resistance to the phrases “tactical” and “nonstrategic” seemed to contradict the NPR’s widespread use of the phrase “non-strategic nuclear weapons,” his response likely reflects a different definition of the dividing line between strategic and nonstrategic nuclear weapons. His comments reflected the view that any use of nuclear weapons would have “strategic effect,” possibly meaning that it would expand and escalate the conflict beyond the immediate battlefield. The distinction, therefore, between a strategic and a nonstrategic nuclear weapon could well reflect the nature of the target or the implications for the conflict, not the yield or delivery vehicle of the attacking warhead. U.S. and Soviet Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons U.S. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons During the Cold War Throughout the Cold War, the United States deployed thousands of shorter-range nuclear weapons with U.S. forces based in Europe and Asia and on ships around the world. The United States maintained these deployments to extend deterrence and to defend its allies. Not only did the presence of these weapons (and the presence of U.S. forces, in general) increase the likelihood that the United States would come to the defense of its allies if they were attacked, the weapons also could have been used on the battlefield to slow or stop the advance of the adversaries’ conventional forces. Strategy and Doctrine In most cases, the United States deployed these weapons to defend U.S. allies against aggression by the Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact allies, but the United States did not rule out their possible use in contingencies with other adversaries. In Europe, these weapons were a part of NATO’s strategy of “flexible response.” Under this strategy, NATO did not insist that it would respond to any type of attack with nuclear weapons, but it maintained the capability to do so and to control escalation if nuclear weapons were used. This approach was intended to convince the Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact that any conflict, even one that began with conventional weapons, could result in nuclear retaliation.28 As the Cold War drew to a close, NATO acknowledged that it would no longer maintain nuclear weapons to deter or defeat a conventional attack from the Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact because “the threat of a simultaneous, full-scale attack on all of NATO’s European fronts has effectively been removed.”29 But NATO documents indicated that these weapons would still play an important political role in NATO’s strategy by ensuring 27 U.S. Congress, House Committee on Armed Services, National Defense Strategy and the Nuclear Posture Review, Hearing, 115th Cong., 2nd sess., February 6, 2018. 28 “The United States retains substantial nuclear capabilities in Europe to counter Warsaw Pact conventional superiority and to serve as a link to U.S. strategic nuclear forces.” National Security Strategy of the United States, White House, January 1988, p. 16. 29 North Atlantic Treaty Organization, “The Alliance’s Strategic Concept,” NATO Office of Information and Press, Brussels, Belgium, 1991, para. 8. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 11 “uncertainty in the mind of any potential aggressor about the nature of the Allies’ response to military aggression.”30 Force Structure Throughout the Cold War, the United States often altered the size and structure of its nonstrategic nuclear forces in response to changing capabilities and changing threat assessments. It deployed these weapons at U.S. bases in Asia, and at bases on the territories of several of the NATO allies, contributing to NATO’s sense of shared responsibility for the weapons. The United States began to reduce these forces in the late 1970s, with the numbers of operational nonstrategic nuclear warheads declining from more than 7,000 in the mid-1970s to below 6,000 in the 1980s, to fewer than 1,000 by the middle of the 1990s.31 These reductions occurred, for the most part, because U.S. and NATO officials believed they could maintain deterrence with fewer, but more modern, weapons. For example, when the NATO allies agreed in 1970 that the United States should deploy new intermediate-range nuclear weapons in Europe, they decided to remove 1,000 older nuclear weapons from Europe. And in 1983, in the Montebello Decision, when the NATO defense ministers approved additional weapons modernization plans, they also called for a further reduction of 1,400 nonstrategic nuclear weapons.32 These modernization programs continued through the 1980s. In his 1988 Annual Report to Congress, Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger noted that the United States was completing the deployment of Pershing II intermediate-range ballistic missiles and ground-launched cruise missiles in Europe; modernizing two types of nuclear artillery shells; upgrading the Lance short-range ballistic missile; continuing production of the nuclear-armed version of the Tomahawk sea-launched cruise missile; and developing a new nuclear depth/strike bomb for U.S. naval forces.33 However, by the end of that decade, as the Warsaw Pact dissolved, the United States had canceled or scaled back all planned modernization programs. In 1987, it also signed the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, which eliminated all U.S. and Soviet ground-launched shorter and intermediate-range ballistic and cruise missiles.34 Soviet Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons During the Cold War Strategy and Doctrine During the Cold War, the Soviet Union also considered nuclear weapons to be instrumental to its military strategy.35 Although the Soviet Union had pledged that it would not be the first to use 30 Ibid., para. 55. 31 Toward a Nuclear Peace: The Future of Nuclear Weapons in U.S. Foreign and Defense Policy, Report of the CSIS Nuclear Strategy Study Group, Center for Strategic and International Studies, 1993. p. 27. 32 The text of the Montebello decision can be found in Larson, Jeffrey A. and Kurt J. Klingenberger, editors. Controlling Non-Strategic Nuclear Weapons. Obstacles and Opportunities, United States Air Force, Institute for National Security Studies, July 2001, pp. 265-266. 33 Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger, Annual Report to the Congress, Fiscal Year 1988, January 1987, pp. 217-218. 34 For a description of the terms and implications of this treaty see, CRS Report RL30033, Arms Control and Disarmament Activities: A Catalog of Recent Events, by Amy F. Woolf, coordinator. (Out of print. For copies, congressional clients may contact Amy Woolf.) 35 For a more detailed review of Soviet and Russian nuclear strategy see CRS Report 97-586, Russia's Nuclear Forces: Doctrine and Force Structure Issues, by Amy F. Woolf and Kara Wilson (Out of print. For copies, congressional clients may contact Amy Woolf.) Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 12 nuclear weapons, most Western observers doubted that it would actually observe this pledge in a conflict. Instead, analysts argue that the Soviet Union had integrated nuclear weapons into its warfighting plans to a much greater degree than the United States. Soviet analysts stressed that these weapons would be useful for both surprise attack and preemptive attack. According to one Russian analyst, the Soviet Union would have used nonstrategic nuclear weapons to conduct strategic operations in the theater of war and to reinforce conventional units in large scale land and sea operations.36 This would have helped the Soviet Union achieve success in these theaters of war and would have diverted forces of the enemy from Soviet territory. The Soviet Union reportedly began to reduce its emphasis on nuclear warfighting strategies in the mid-1980s, under Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev. He reportedly believed that the use of nuclear weapons would be catastrophic. Nevertheless, they remained a key tool of deterring and fighting a large-scale conflict with the United States and NATO. Force Structure The Soviet Union produced and deployed a wide range of delivery vehicles for nonstrategic nuclear weapons. At different times during the period, it deployed devices that were small enough to fit into a suitcase-sized container, nuclear mines, shells for artillery, short-, medium-, and intermediate-range ballistic missiles, short-range air-delivered missiles, and gravity bombs. The Soviet Union deployed these weapons at nearly 600 bases, with some located in Warsaw Pact nations in Eastern Europe, some in the non-Russian republics on the western and southern perimeter of the nation, and throughout Russia. Estimates vary, but many analysts believe that, in 1991, the Soviet Union had more than 20,000 of these weapons. The numbers may have been higher, in the range of 25,000 weapons in earlier years, before the collapse of the Warsaw Pact.37 The 1991 Presidential Nuclear Initiatives In September and October 1991, U.S. President George H. W. Bush and Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev sharply altered their nations’ deployments of nonstrategic nuclear weapons.38 Each announced unilateral, but reciprocal initiatives that marked the end of many elements of their Cold War nuclear arsenals. U.S. Initiative On September 27, 1991, U.S. President George H. W. Bush announced that the United States would withdraw all land-based tactical nuclear weapons (those that could travel less than 300 miles) from overseas bases and all sea-based tactical nuclear weapons from U.S. surface ships, submarines, and naval aircraft.39 Under these measures the United States began dismantling 36 Ivan Safranchuk, “Tactical Nuclear Weapons in the Modern World: A Russian Perspective,” in Alexander, Brian and Alistair Millar, editors, Tactical Nuclear Weapons (Washington, DC: Brassey’s Inc., 2003), p. 53. 37 Joshua Handler, “The 1991-1992 PNIs and the Elimination, Storage and Security of Tactical Nuclear Weapons,” in Alexander, Brian and Alistair Millar, editors, Tactical Nuclear Weapons (Washington, DC: Brassey’s Inc., 2003), p. 31. 38 The speeches outlining these initiatives can be found in Larson, Jeffrey A. and Kurt J. Klingenberger, editors, Controlling Non-Strategic Nuclear Weapons. Obstacles and Opportunities, United States Air Force, Institute for National Security Studies, July 2001, pp. 273-283. 39 President Bush also announced that he would remove from alert all U.S. strategic bombers and 450 Minuteman II ICBMs that were to be eliminated under the START Treaty. He also cancelled several modernization programs for strategic and nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 13 approximately 2,150 warheads from the land-based delivery systems, including 850 warheads for Lance missiles and 1,300 artillery shells. It also withdrew about 500 weapons normally deployed aboard surface ships and submarines, and planned to eliminate around 900 B-57 depth bombs,40 which had been deployed on land and at sea, and the weapons for land-based naval aircraft.41 Furthermore, in late 1991, NATO decided to reduce by about half the number of weapons for nuclear-capable aircraft based in Europe, which led to the withdrawal of an additional 700 U.S. air-delivered nuclear weapons. The United States implemented these measures very quickly. The United States removed its nonstrategic nuclear weapons from bases around the world by mid-1992. The Navy had withdrawn nuclear weapons from its surface ships, submarines, and forward bases by mid-1992.42 The warhead dismantlement process has moved more slowly, taking most of the 1990s to complete for some weapons, but this was due to the limits on capacity at the Pantex Plant in Texas, where dismantlement occurs. The first Bush Administration decided to withdraw these weapons for several reasons. First, the threat the weapons were to deter—Soviet and Warsaw Pact attacks in Europe—had diminished with the collapse of the Warsaw Pact in 1989. Further, the military utility of the land-based weapons had declined as the Soviet Union pulled its forces eastward, beyond the range of these weapons. The utility of the sea-based weapons had also declined as a result of changes in U.S. warfighting concepts that accompanied the end of the Cold War. Moreover, the withdrawal of the sea-based weapons helped ease a source of tensions between the United States and some allies, such as New Zealand and Japan, who had been uncomfortable with the possible presence of nuclear weapons during port visits by U.S. naval forces.43 The President’s announcement also responded to growing concerns among analysts about the safety and security of Soviet nonstrategic nuclear weapons. The Soviet Union had deployed thousands of these weapons at bases in remote areas of its territory and at bases outside Soviet territory in Eastern Europe. The demise of the Warsaw Pact and political upheaval in Eastern Europe generated concerns about the safety of these weapons. The abortive coup in Moscow in August 1991 had also caused alarms about the strength of central control over nuclear weapons inside the Soviet Union. The U.S. initiative was not contingent on a Soviet response, and the Bush Administration did not consult with Soviet leadership prior to its public announcement, but many hoped that the U.S. initiative would provide President Gorbachev with the incentive to take similar steps to withdraw and eliminate many of his nation’s nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Soviet and Russian Initiatives On October 5, 1991, Russia’s President Gorbachev replied that he, too, would withdraw and eliminate nonstrategic nuclear weapons.44 He stated that the Soviet Union would destroy all nuclear artillery ammunition and warheads for tactical missiles; remove warheads for nuclear antiaircraft missiles and destroy some of them; destroy all nuclear land mines; and remove all 40 Joshua Handler, in Alexander and Millar, Tactical Nuclear Weapons, pp. 21-22. 41 The United States maintained the capability to return sea-based nuclear weapons to aircraft carriers and submarines until this policy was changed through the Nuclear Posture Reviews of 1994 and 2001. 42 Joshua Handler, in Alexander and Millar, Tactical Nuclear Weapons, p. 22. 43 See, for example, CRS Report 85-92 Crisis in U.S.-New Zealand Relations, by Robert G. Sutter, (Out of print. For copies, congressional clients may contact Amy Woolf.) 44 President Gorbachev also addressed strategic nuclear weapons in his initiative, announcing that he would remove bombers and more than 500 ballistic missiles from alert and cancelling many modernization programs. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 14 naval nonstrategic weapons from submarines and surface ships and ground-based naval aviation, destroying some of them. Estimates of the numbers of nonstrategic nuclear weapons deployed by the Soviet Union varied, with a range as great as 15,000-21,700 nonstrategic nuclear weapons in the Soviet arsenal in 1991.45 Consequently, analysts expected these measures to affect several thousand weapons. Russia’s President Boris Yeltsin pledged to continue implementing these measures after the Soviet Union collapsed at the end of 1991. He also stated that Russia would destroy many of the warheads removed from nonstrategic nuclear weapons.46 These included all warheads from short-range missiles, artillery, and atomic demolition devices; one-third of the warheads from sea-based nonstrategic weapons; half of the warheads from air-defense interceptors; and half of the warheads from the Air Force’s nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Reports indicate that the Soviet Union had begun removing nonstrategic nuclear weapons from bases outside Soviet territory after the collapse of the Warsaw Pact, and had probably removed all of them from Eastern Europe and the Transcaucasus prior to the 1991 announcements. Nevertheless, President Gorbachev’s pledge to withdraw and eliminate many of these weapons spurred their removal from other former Soviet states after the collapse of the Soviet Union. Reports indicate that they had all been removed from the Baltic States and Central Asian republics by the end of 1991, and from Ukraine and Belarus by mid-late spring 1992.47 The status of nonstrategic nuclear weapons deployed on Russian territory is far less certain. According to some estimates, Russia removed the naval systems from deployment by the end of 1993, but the Army and Air Force systems remained in the field until 1996 and 1997.48 Furthermore, Russia has been far slower to eliminate the warheads from these systems than has the United States. Some analysts and experts in the United States have expressed concerns about the slow pace of eliminations in Russia. They note that the continuing existence of these warheads, along with the increasing reliance on nuclear weapons in Russia’s national security strategy, indicate that Russia may reverse its pledges and reintroduce nonstrategic nuclear weapons into its deployed forces. Others note that financial constraints could have slowed the elimination of these warheads, or that Russia decided to coordinate the elimination effort with the previously scheduled retirement of older weapons.49 U.S. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons after the Cold War Strategy and Doctrine NATO Policy In U.S. and NATO policy, nonstrategic nuclear weapons have served not only as a deterrent to a wide range of potential aggressors, but also as an important element in NATO’s cohesion as an 45 Joshua Handler, in Alexander and Millar, Tactical Nuclear Weapons, p. 31. 46 For the text of President Yeltsin’s statement, see Larsen and Klingenberger, pp. 284-289. 47 Joshua Handler, in Alexander and Millar, Tactical Nuclear Weapons, p. 22. 48 Joshua Handler, “The September 1991 PNIs and the Elimination, Storage and Security Aspects of TNWs,” Presentation for seminar at the United Nations, New York, September 24, 2001. 49 For details on current concerns with Russia’s nonstrategic nuclear weapons, see Miles Pomper, William Potter, and Nikolai Sokov, Reducing and Regulating Tactical (Nonstrategic) Nuclear Weapons in Europe, The James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies, Monterey Institute of International Studies, Monterey, CA, December 2009. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 15 alliance. Even after the demise of the Soviet Union in the 1990s, NATO reaffirmed the importance of nonstrategic nuclear weapons for deterrence and alliance cohesion several times. In the press communiqué released after their November 1995 meeting, the members of NATO’s Defense Planning Committee and Nuclear Planning Group stated that “Alliance Solidarity, common commitment, and strategic unity are demonstrated through the current basing of deployable sub-strategic [nuclear] forces in Europe.”50 In 1997, in the Founding Act on Mutual Relations, Cooperation, and Security Between the Russian Federation and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, NATO members assured Russia that it had “no intention, no plan, and no reason to deploy nuclear weapons on the territory of new members.” But NATO also stated that it had no need “to change any aspect of NATO’s nuclear policy—and do not foresee any future need to do so [emphasis added].”51 Finally, the “New Strategic Concept” signed in April 1999 stated that “to protect peace and to prevent war or any kind of coercion, the Alliance will maintain for the foreseeable future an appropriate mix of nuclear and conventional forces. Nuclear weapons make a unique contribution in rendering the risks of aggression against the Alliance incalculable and unacceptable.”52 NATO completed the next review of its Strategic Concept in November 2010. In this document, the allies indicated that “deterrence, based on an appropriate mix of nuclear and conventional capabilities, remains a core element of our overall strategy.” The document went on to indicate that NATO would remain a nuclear alliance as long as nuclear weapons continued to exist. It also noted that the alliance would “maintain an appropriate mix of nuclear and conventional forces” to ensure that “NATO has the full range of capabilities to deter and defend against any threat.” However, the Strategic Concept did not refer, specifically, to the U.S. nuclear weapons based in Europe, as had the communiqué released in 1995. Instead, the Strategic Concept noted that the “supreme guarantee of the security of the Allies is provided by the strategic nuclear forces of the Alliance, particularly those of the United States [emphasis added].” It went on to indicate that “the independent strategic nuclear forces of the United Kingdom and France, which have a deterrent role of their own, contribute to the overall deterrence and security of the Allies.”53 Moreover, the 2010 Strategic Concept alluded to the possibility of further reductions in nuclear weapons, both within the alliance and globally, in the future. The document noted that the allies are “resolved to seek a safer world for all and to create the conditions for a world without nuclear weapons in accordance with the goals of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, in a way that promotes international stability, and is based on the principle of undiminished security for all.” It also noted that the alliance had “dramatically reduced the number of nuclear weapons stationed in Europe” and had reduced the role of nuclear weapons in NATO strategy.” The allies pledged to “seek to create the conditions for further reductions in the future.” The Strategic Concept indicated that the goal in these reductions should be to “seek Russian agreement to increase transparency on its nuclear weapons in Europe and relocate these weapons away from the territory of NATO members.” Moreover, the document noted that this arms control process “must take into account the disparity with the greater Russian stockpiles of short-range nuclear 50 NATO Press Communique M-DPC/NPG-2(95)117, November 29, 1995, para. 21. 51 “Founding Act on Mutual Relations, Cooperation, and Security Between the Russian Federation and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,” signed at Paris, May 27, 1997. 52 The Alliance’s Strategic Concept, approved by the Heads of State and Government participating in the meeting of the North Atlantic Council in Washington, DC, April 23-24, 1999. 53 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Active Engagement, Modern Defence, Strategic Concept For the Defence and Security of The Members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Lisbon, Portugal, November 29, 2010, pp. 4-5, http://www.nato.int/lisbon2010/strategic-concept-2010-eng.pdf. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 16 weapons.”54 Hence, even though NATO no longer viewed Russia as an adversary, the allies apparently agreed that the disparity in nonstrategic nuclear weapons could create security concerns for some members of the alliance. In recognition of different views about the role or nuclear weapons in alliance policy, the allies agreed that they would continue to review NATO’s deterrence and defense posture in a study completed in time for NATO’s May 2012 summit in Chicago. They agreed that the Deterrence and Defense Posture Review (DDPR) would examine the full range of capabilities required, including nuclear weapons, missile defense, and other means of strategic deterrence and defense.55 However, the completed DDPR did not recommend any changes in NATO’s nuclear posture. Instead, it noted that “nuclear weapons are a core component of NATO’s overall capabilities for deterrence and defence,” and that “the Alliance’s nuclear force posture currently meets the criteria for an effective deterrence and defence posture.”56 This force posture includes shared rights and responsibilities, with nuclear weapons stored at bases on the territories of five NATO nations, and all NATO nations (except France, which has chosen not to participate in nuclear decisionmaking or operations) participating in nuclear planning and policymaking. Specifically, NATO calls for “the broadest possible participation of Allies in collective defence planning on nuclear roles, in peacetime basing of nuclear forces, and in command, control and consultation arrangements.” The DDPR reiterated the alliance’s interest in pursuing arms control measures with Russia to address concerns with these weapons. It noted that the allies “look forward to continuing to develop and exchange transparency and confidence-building ideas with the Russian Federation in the NATO-Russia Council, with the goal of developing detailed proposals on and increasing mutual understanding of NATO’s and Russia’s non-strategic nuclear force postures in Europe.” It also indicated that NATO would “consider, in the context of the broader security environment, what [it] would expect to see in the way of reciprocal Russian actions to allow for significant reductions in forward-based non-strategic nuclear weapons assigned to NATO.”57 In other words, NATO would link any further changes in its nuclear posture to reciprocal changes in Russia’s nonstrategic nuclear weapons posture. NATO continued to review and revise its statements about nuclear weapons during its summits in Wales (2014), Warsaw (2016), and Brussels (2018). These summits occurred after Russia’s annexation of Crimea and in the shadow of Russia’s continuing aggressive behavior in Europe. While most of the efforts announced after these summits sought to bolster NATO’s conventional capabilities and demonstrate an enduring commitment to the defense of all NATO allies, some also addressed the role of nuclear weapons and arms control in NATO strategy. For example, Paragraph 51 of the Warsaw Summit Communique confirms that “the greatest responsibility of the Alliance is to protect and defend our territory and our populations against attack ...” and that “no one should doubt NATO’s resolve if the security of any of its members were to be threatened.” As was noted above, the statement also reaffirmed the important role of nuclear deterrence in alliance security. It indicated that “the strategic forces of the Alliance, particularly those of the United States, are the supreme guarantee of the security of the Allies” and that “the independent 54 Ibid., pp. 7-8. 55 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Lisbon Summit Declaration, Lisbon, Portugal, November 20, 2010, http://www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/official_texts_68828.htm. 56 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Deterrence and Defense Posture Review, Press Release, Chicago, IL, May 20, 2012, p. 2. http://www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/official_texts_87597.htm?mode=pressrelease. 57 Ibid., p. 4. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 17 strategic nuclear forces of the United Kingdom and France have a deterrent role of their own and contribute to the overall security of the Alliance.” Moreover, the allies reaffirmed that “NATO’s nuclear deterrence posture also relies, in part, on United States’ nuclear weapons forward-deployed in Europe and on capabilities and infrastructure provided by Allies concerned.” In addition, in response to concerns about Russian nuclear doctrine, the statement emphasized that “any employment of nuclear weapons against NATO would fundamentally alter the nature of a conflict” and, “if the fundamental security of any of its members were to be threatened however, NATO has the capabilities and resolve to impose costs on an adversary that would be unacceptable and far outweigh the benefits that an adversary could hope to achieve.” On the other hand, the Warsaw Summit Communique recognized the strains on the arms control relationship with Russia. Where the 2012 DDPR had called for discussions with Russia on transparency and confidence-building and indicated that NATO would consider negotiating reductions in forward-based forces, the 2016 Warsaw statement simply noted that “arms control, disarmament, and non-proliferation continue to play an important role in the achievement of the Alliance’s security objectives.” It then stated that, “in this context, it is of paramount importance that disarmament and non-proliferation commitments under existing treaties are honoured ... ” and called on “Russia to preserve the viability of the INF Treaty through ensuring full and verifiable compliance.”58 The communique released after the Brussels summit in July 2018 reiterated many of the points raised in previous communiques.59 In several places, the allies noted that the changing security environment necessitated efforts to bolster the deterrence “as a core element” of the alliance’s collective defense and noted that credible deterrence “will continue to be based on an appropriate mix of nuclear, conventional, and missile defence capabilities.” It also stated that a “robust deterrence and defence posture strengthens Alliance cohesion and provides an essential political and military transatlantic link, through an equitable and sustainable distribution of roles, responsibilities, and burdens.” At the same time, the 2018 communique went further in highlighting the allies’ concerns with Russia’s violation of the INF Treaty. The communique noted that the INF Treaty “has been crucial to Euro-Atlantic security” and pointed out that “full compliance with the INF Treaty is essential.” It supported the U.S. position on Russian noncompliance, noting that the “allies have identified a Russian missile system, the 9M729, which raises serious concerns” and that “a pattern of behaviour and information over many years has led to widespread doubts about Russian compliance.” These concerns reached a peak in late 2018, when the United States announced that it would withdraw from the INF Treaty in response to Russia’s violation.60 After their meeting on December 4, 2018, the NATO Foreign Ministers released a statement noting that the “allies have concluded that Russia has developed and fielded a missile system, the 9M729, which violates the INF Treaty” and that they “strongly support the finding of the United States that Russia is in material breach of its obligations under the INF Treaty.” At the same time, though, they noted that the “allies are firmly committed to the preservation of effective international arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation” and therefore, “will continue to uphold, support, and further 58 North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Warsaw Summit Communique, Warsaw, Poland, July 9, 2016, http://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/official_texts_133169.htm?selectedLocale=en. 59 https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/official_texts_156624.htm. 60 The United States formally notified Russia of its intent to withdraw from INF on February 2, 2019, with the formal withdrawal completed on August 2, 2019. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 18 strengthen arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation, as a key element of Euro-Atlantic security, taking into account the prevailing security environment.”61 Extended Deterrence Recent discussions about the U.S. nuclear weapons policy have placed a renewed emphasis on the role of U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons in extended deterrence and assurance. Extended deterrence refers to the U.S. threat to use nuclear weapons in response to attacks, from Russia or other adversaries, against allies in NATO and some allies in Asia.62 Assurance refers to the U.S. promise, made to those same allies, to come to their defense and assistance if they are threatened or attacked. The weapons deployed in Europe are a visible reminder of that commitment; nuclear capable bombers that were based in Guam served a similar purpose for U.S. allies in Asia.63 Recent debates, however, have focused on the question of whether a credible U.S. extended deterrent requires that the United States maintain weapons deployed in Europe, and the ability to deploy them in the Pacific, or whether other U.S. military capabilities, including strategic nuclear weapons and conventional forces, may be sufficient.64 In the 2010 Nuclear Posture Review, the Obama Administration stated that the United States “will continue to assure our allies and partners of our commitment to their security and to demonstrate this commitment not only through words, but also through deeds.”65 The NPR indicated that a wide range of U.S. military capabilities would support this goal, but also indicated that U.S. commitments would “retain a nuclear dimension as long as nuclear threats to U.S. allies and partners remain.” The Administration did not, however, specify that the nuclear dimension would be met with nonstrategic nuclear weapons; the full range of U.S. capabilities would likely be available to support and defend U.S. allies. In addition, the Administration announced that the United States would retire the nuclear-armed sea-launched cruise missiles that had helped provide assurances to U.S. allies in Asia. In essence, the Administration concluded that the United States could reassure U.S. allies in Asia, and deter threats to their security, without deploying sea-based cruise missiles to the region in a crisis. Moreover, the possible use of nuclear weapons, and extended nuclear deterrence, were a part of a broader concept that the Obama Administration referred to as “regional security architectures.” The 2010 NPR indicated that regional security architectures were a key part of “the U.S. strategy for strengthening regional deterrence while reducing the role and numbers of nuclear weapons.” 61 North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Statement on the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, Brussels, Belgium, December 4, 2018, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/official_texts_161122.htm?selectedLocale=en. 62 The United States extends nuclear deterrence to Japan, South Korea, and Australia. It may also assure other allies of the U.S. commitment to their security, but these assurances do not necessarily include legally binding commitments to retaliate with nuclear weapons, if necessary. See Clark A. Murdock and Jessica M. Yeats, Exploring the Nuclear Posture Implications of Extended Deterrence and Assurance, CSIS, Workshop Proceeding and Key Takeaways, Washington, DC, November 2009, http://csis.org/publication/exploring-nuclear-posture-implications-extended-deterrence-and-assurance. 63 The Air Force rotated B-1, B-2, and B-52 bombers through Guam for 16 years. During that time, it occasionally conducted missions with the bombers flying over the Korean Peninsula in a show of support to the Republic of Korea. It recently ended this mission and now plans to fly bombers into the region on a less regular schedule. Brian W. Everstine, “AFGSC’s New Plan to Deploy Bombers Across the Globe,” Air Force Magazine, April 29, 2020, https://www.airforcemag.com/afgscs-new-plan-to-deploy-bombers-across-the-globe/. 64 For see a discussion of these issues, see several essays in In the Eyes of the Experts: Analysis and Comments on America’s Strategic Posture, ed. Taylor Bolz (Washington: United States Institute of Peace Press, 2009). 65 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, April 6, 2010, p. 31, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/features/defenseReviews/NPR/2010_Nuclear_Posture_Review_Report.pdf. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 19 As a result, these architectures would “include effective missile defense, counter-WMD capabilities, conventional power-projection capabilities, and integrated command and control—all underwritten by strong political commitments.”66 In other words, although the United States would continue to extend deterrence to its allies and seek to assure them of the U.S. commitment to their security, it would draw on political commitments and a range of military capabilities to achieve these goals. During the presidential campaign, President Trump questioned the value of U.S. alliance relationships in general and the relevance of NATO in particular. He argued that the United States was overextended around the world and that U.S. allies should contribute more toward their own defense or at least pay more for U.S. security guarantees. Moreover, he suggested that some U.S. allies would be better served if they acquired their own nuclear weapons rather than relying on U.S. nuclear weapons for their defense. These ideas did not translate into policy in the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review. To the contrary, the NPR asserts that the U.S. commitment to NATO and to allies and partners in the Asia-Pacific region “is unwavering.”67 Concerns about the regional threats to U.S. allies in Europe and Asia and about the credibility of U.S. assurances to these allies dominate the analysis in the NPR. However, while the 2010 NPR called for a strengthening of U.S. conventional capabilities and missile defenses as a part of its effort to strengthen extended deterrence, the 2018 NPR focuses almost exclusively on enhancements to U.S. nuclear capabilities. It does not completely dismiss the value of U.S. conventional capabilities, but asserts that “conventional forces alone are inadequate to assure many allies who rightly place enormous value on U.S. extended nuclear deterrence for their security.”68 According to the NPR, these concerns are central to the recommendation that the United States develop two new types of nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Regional Contingencies In the past, U.S. discussions about nonstrategic nuclear weapons have also addressed questions about the role they might play in deterring or responding to regional contingencies that involved threats from nations that did not possess nuclear weapons. For example, former Secretary of Defense Perry stated, during the Clinton Administration, that “maintaining U.S. nuclear commitments with NATO, and retaining the ability to deploy nuclear capabilities to meet various regional contingencies, continues to be an important means for deterring aggression, protecting and promoting U.S. interests, reassuring allies and friends, and preventing proliferation (emphasis added).”69 Specifically, both during the Cold War and after the demise of the Soviet Union, the United States maintained the option to use nuclear weapons in response to attacks with conventional, chemical, or biological weapons. For example, in 1999, Assistant Secretary of Defense Edward Warner testified that “the U.S. capability to deliver an overwhelming, rapid, and devastating military response with the full range of military capabilities will remain the cornerstone of our strategy for deterring rogue nation ballistic missile and WMD proliferation threats. The very existence of U.S. strategic and theater nuclear forces, backed by highly capable conventional forces, should 66 Ibid., p. 32. 67 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, pp. 35-36, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. 68 Ibid., p. 17. 69 Secretary of Defense William J. Perry, Annual Report to the President and the Congress, February 1995, p. 84. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 20 certainly give pause to any rogue leader contemplating the use of WMD against the United States, its overseas deployed forces, or its allies.”70 These statements do not indicate whether nonstrategic nuclear weapons would be used to achieve battlefield or tactical objectives, or whether they would contribute to strategic missions, but it remained evident, throughout the 1990s, that the United States continued to view these weapons as a part of its national security strategy. The George W. Bush Administration also emphasized the possible use of nuclear weapons in regional contingencies in its 2001 Nuclear Posture Review. The Bush Administration appeared to shift toward a somewhat more explicit approach when acknowledging that the United States might use nuclear weapons in response to attacks by nations armed with chemical, biological, and conventional weapons, stating that the United States would develop and deploy those nuclear capabilities that it would need to defeat the capabilities of any potential adversary whether or not it possessed nuclear weapons.71 This does not, by itself, indicate that the United States would plan to use nonstrategic nuclear weapons. However, many analysts concluded from these and other comments by Bush Administration officials that the United States was planning for the tactical, first use of nuclear weapons. The Bush Administration never confirmed this view, and, instead, indicated that it would not use nuclear weapons in anything other than the most grave of circumstances. The Obama Administration, on the other hand, seemed to foreclose the option of using nuclear weapons in some regional contingencies. Specifically, it stated, in the 2010 NPR, that “the United States will not use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapons states that are party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and in compliance with their nuclear non-proliferation obligations.” Specifically, if such a nation were to attack the United States with conventional, chemical, or biological weapons, the United States would respond with overwhelming conventional force, but it would not threaten to use nuclear weapons if the attacking nation was in compliance with its nuclear nonproliferation obligations and it did not have nuclear weapons of its own.72 At the same time, though, the NPR stated that any state that used chemical or biological weapons “against the United States or its allies and partners would face the prospect of a devastating conventional military response—and that any individuals responsible for the attack, whether national leaders or military commanders, would be held fully accountable.”73 The 2018 NPR echoed some of the Obama Administration’s policy, but altered it to track more closely with the policy of the Bush Administration. First, the 2018 NPR repeated the paragraph from the 2010 NPR stating that “the United States will not use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapons states that are party to the NPT and in compliance with their nuclear 70 Statement of the Honorable Edward L. Warner, III, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Strategy and Threat Reduction, before the Senate Armed Services Subcommittee on Strategic Forces, April 14, 1999. 71 See, for example, “Global Strike: A Chronology of the Pentagon’s New Offensive Strike Plan,” by Hans M. Kristensen, Federation of American Scientists, March 15, 2005, p. 108. 72 The NPR did include caveats to this declaration. The Obama Administration stated that it would not use nuclear weapons in response to chemical or biological attack, if the attacking nation were in compliance with its nuclear nonproliferation obligations. The possibility of a nuclear response remained, however, if a nation armed with nuclear weapons uses nuclear, chemical, biological, or even conventional weapons against U.S. forces or allies. In addition, the NPR stated that the United States might reconsider the pledge not to respond to biological weapons with nuclear weapons in the future. 73 Nuclear Posture Review, p. 16, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/features/defenseReviews/NPR/2010_Nuclear_Posture_Review_Report.pdf. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 21 non-proliferation obligations.”74 But it then stated that “the United States reserves the right to make any adjustment in the assurance that may be warranted by the evolution and proliferation of non-nuclear strategic attack technologies [emphasis added] and U.S. capabilities to counter that threat.” Elsewhere in the document the NPR indicated that non-nuclear strategic attacks could include chemical, biological, cyber, and large-scale conventional aggression.75 Hence, where the Obama Administration left open the possibility of nuclear retaliation in response to biological attacks, but stated that other threats could be deterred by the prospect of a devastating conventional response, the Trump Administration included a wider range of circumstances where the United States might retaliate with nuclear weapons after an attack. Force Structure Through the late 1990s and early in George W. Bush Administration, the United States maintained approximately 1,100 nonstrategic nuclear weapons in its active stockpile. Unclassified reports indicate that, of this number, around 500 were air-delivered bombs deployed at bases in Europe. The remainder, including some additional air-delivered bombs and around 320 nuclear-armed sea-launched cruise missiles, were held in storage areas in the United States.76 After the Clinton Administration’s 1994 Nuclear Posture Review, the United States eliminated its ability to return nuclear weapons to U.S. surface ships (it had retained this ability after removing the weapons under the 1991 PNI). It retained, however, its ability to restore cruise missiles to attack submarines, and it did not recommend any changes in the number of air-delivered weapons deployed in Europe. During this time, the United States also consolidated its weapons storage sites for nonstrategic nuclear weapons. It reportedly reduced the number of these facilities “by over 75%” between 1988 and 1994. It eliminated two of its four storage sites for sea-launched cruise missiles, retaining only one facility on each coast of the United States. It also reduced the number of bases in Europe that store nuclear weapons from over 125 bases in the mid-1980s to 10 bases, in seven countries, by 2000.77 The Bush Administration did not recommend any changes for U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons after completing its Nuclear Posture Review in 2001. Reports indicate that it decided to retain the capability to restore cruise missiles to attack submarines because of their ability to deploy, in secret, anywhere on the globe in time of crisis.78 The NPR also did not recommend any changes to the deployment of nonstrategic nuclear weapons in Europe, leaving decisions about their status to the members of the NATO alliance. Nevertheless, according to unclassified reports, the United States did reduce the number of nuclear weapons deployed in Europe and the number of facilities that house those weapons during the George W. Bush Administration. Some reports indicate that most of the weapons were withdrawn from Europe between 2001 and 2006. According to unclassified reports, some are stored at U.S. bases and would be delivered by U.S. aircraft; others are stored at bases operated 74 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, p. 21, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. 75 Ibid. p. 38. 76 “NRDC Nuclear Notebook: U.S. Nuclear Forces, 2007,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, January/February 2007. See, also, U.S. Nuclear Weapons in Europe, 1954-2004, by Robert S. Norris and Hans M. Kristensen. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, November/December 2004. 77 Joshua Handler, in Alexander and Millar, Tactical Nuclear Weapons, pp. 23-25. 78 Norris and Kristensen, op. cit. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 22 by the “host nation” and would be delivered by that nation’s aircraft if NATO decided to employ nuclear weapons. The Obama Administration did not announce any further reductions to U.S. nuclear weapons in Europe but it indicated that the United States would “consult with our allies regarding the future basing of nuclear weapons in Europe.” In the months prior to the completion of NATO’s 2010 Strategic Concept, some politicians in some European nations did propose that the United States withdraw these weapons. For example, Guido Westerwelle, Germany’s foreign minister, stated that he supported the withdrawal of U.S. nuclear weapons from Germany.79 As was noted above, NATO did not call for the removal of these weapons in its new Strategic Concept, but did indicate that it would be open to reducing them as a result of arms control negotiations with Russia. Moreover, in the 2010 NPR, the Obama Administration indicated that it would take the steps necessary to maintain the capability to deploy U.S. nuclear weapons in Europe. It indicated that the U.S. Air Force would retain the capability to deliver both nuclear and conventional weapons as it replaced aging F-16 aircraft with the new F-35 Joint Strike Fighter. The NPR also indicated that the United States would conduct a “full scope” life extension program for the B61 bomb, the weapon that is currently deployed in Europe, “to ensure its functionality with the F-35.” This life extension program will consolidate four versions of the B61 bomb, including the B61-3 and B61-4 that are currently deployed in Europe, into one version, the B61-12. Reports indicate that this new version will reuse the nuclear components of the older bombs, but will include enhanced safety and security features and a new “tail kit” that will increase the accuracy of the weapon.80 On the other hand, the 2010 NPR indicated that the U.S. Navy would retire its nuclear-armed, sea-launched cruise missiles (TLAM-N). It indicated that “this system serves a redundant purpose in the U.S. nuclear stockpile” because it is one of several weapons the United States could deploy forward. The NPR also noted that “U.S. ICBMs and SLBMs are capable of striking any potential adversary.” As a result, because “the deterrence and assurance roles of TLAM-N can be adequately substituted by these other means,” the United States could continue to extend deterrence and provide assurance to its allies in Asia without maintaining the capability to redeploy TLAM-N missiles.81 As was noted above, the Trump Administration’s NPR reaffirmed many of the policies and programs the United States has pursued in recent years. It did not announce any changes to the current basing of U.S. nuclear weapons in Europe, and reaffirmed the U.S. commitment to upgrading U.S. dual-capable aircraft (DCA) with the nuclear-capable F-35 aircraft. It indicated that the United States would “maintain, and enhance as necessary, the capability to forward deploy nuclear bombers and DCA around the world” and would “work with NATO to best ensure—and improve where needed—the readiness, survivability, and operational effectiveness of DCA based in Europe.”82 The 2018 NPR also reinforced U.S. support for measures that NATO is taking to ensure that its “overall deterrence and defense posture, including its nuclear forces, remain capable of 79 Julian Borger, “Germans Press for Removal of U.S. Nuclear Weapons in Europe,” The Guardian, November 7, 2009. 80 Hans M. Kristensen, Non-Strategic Nuclear Weapons, Federation of American Scientists, Special Report No. 3, Washington, DC, May 2012, p. 24, http://www.fas.org/_docs/Non_Strategic_Nuclear_Weapons.pdf. 81 Nuclear Posture Review, p. 28, https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/features/defenseReviews/NPR/2010_Nuclear_Posture_Review_Report.pdf. 82 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, p. 54, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 23 addressing any potential adversary’s doctrine and capabilities.” These measures include, among other things, enhancing “the readiness and survivability of NATO DCA” and improving the “capabilities required to increase their operational effectiveness”; promoting “the broadest possible participation of Allies in their agreed burden sharing arrangements”; and enhancing “the realism of training and exercise programs to ensure the Alliance can effectively integrate nuclear and non-nuclear operations.”83 On the other hand, the 2018 NPR reversed the Obama Administration’s decision to remove sea-launched cruise missiles from the U.S. force structure. Where the 2010 NPR asserted that the capabilities provided by a SLCM were redundant with those available on other forward-deployable systems, the 2018 NPR argued that the SLCM would provide the United States with “a needed non-strategic regional presence” that would address “the increasing need for flexible and low-yield options.” According to the NPR, this would strengthen deterrence of regional adversaries and assure allies of the U.S. commitment to their defense. The NPR also indicated that a new SLCM program could serve as a response to Russia’s violation of the 1987 Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty and a “necessary incentive for Russia to negotiate seriously a reduction of its non-strategic nuclear weapons.”84 Russian Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons after the Cold War Strategy and Doctrine Russia has altered and adjusted the Soviet nuclear strategy to meet its new circumstances in a post-Cold War world.85 It explicitly rejected the Soviet Union’s no-first-use pledge in 1993, indicating that it viewed nuclear weapons as a central feature in its military and security strategies. However, Russia did not maintain the Soviet Union’s view of the need for nuclear weapons to conduct surprise attacks or preemptive attacks. Instead, it seems to view these weapons as more defensive in nature, as a deterrent to conventional or nuclear attack and as a means to retaliate and defend itself if an attack were to occur. Russia has revised its national security and military strategy several times in the past 20 years, with successive versions appearing to place a greater reliance on nuclear weapons.86 For example, the military doctrine issued in 1997 allowed for the use of nuclear weapons “in case of a threat to the existence of the Russian Federation.” The doctrine published in 2000 expanded the circumstances when Russia might use nuclear weapons to include attacks using weapons of mass destruction against Russia or its allies “as well as in response to large-scale aggression utilizing conventional weapons in situations critical to the national security of the Russian Federation.”87 In mid-2009, when discussing the revision of Russia’s defense strategy that was expected late in 2009 or early 2010, Nikolai Patrushev, the head of Russia’s Presidential Security Council, 83 Ibid., p. 36. 84 Ibid., p. 55. 85 For details on Russia’s nuclear strategy and nuclear forces, see CRS Report R45861, Russia’s Nuclear Weapons: Doctrine, Forces, and Modernization, by Amy F. Woolf. 86 According to Alexander Pikayev, a Russian defense analyst, scenarios for the possible use of nuclear weapons broadened since 1993 and 1997. See David Hoffman, “New Russian Security Plan Criticizes West, Doctrine Broadens Nuclear Use Policy,” Washington Post, January 15, 2000, p. 1. 87 “Russia’s Military Doctrine,” Reprinted in Arms Control Today, May 2000. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 24 indicated that Russia would have the option to launch a “preemptive nuclear strike” against an aggressor “using conventional weapons in an all-out, regional, or even local war.”88 However, when Russia published the final draft of the doctrine, in early 2010, it did not specifically authorize the preemptive use of nuclear weapons. Instead, it stated that “Russia reserves the right to use nuclear weapons in response to a use of nuclear or other weapons of mass destruction against her and (or) her allies, and in a case of an aggression against her with conventional weapons that would put in danger the very existence of the state.”89 Instead of expanding the range of circumstances when Russia might use nuclear weapons, this actually seemed to narrow the range, from the 2000 version that allowed for nuclear use “in situations critical to the national security of the Russian Federation” to the current form that states they might be used in a case “that would put in danger the very existence of the state.”90 Hence, there was little indication that Russia plans to use nuclear weapons at the outset of a conflict, before it engaged with conventional weapons, even though Russia could resort to the use of nuclear weapons first, during an ongoing conventional conflict.91 This was not new, and has been a part of Russian military doctrine for years. Analysts have identified several factors that contributed to Russia’s increasing dependence on nuclear weapons. First, with the demise of the Soviet Union and the economic upheavals of the 1990s, Russia no longer had the means to support a large and effective conventional army. The conflicts in Chechnya and Georgia highlighted seeming weaknesses in Russia’s conventional military forces. Russian analysts also saw emerging threats in other former Soviet states along Russia’s periphery. Many analysts believed that by threatening, even implicitly, that it might resort to nuclear weapons, Russia hoped it could enhance its ability to deter similar regional conflicts. Russia’s sense of vulnerability, and its view that the threats to its security were increasing, also stemmed from the debates over NATO enlargement. Russia has feared the growing alliance would create a new challenge to Russia’s security, particularly if NATO moved nuclear weapons closer to Russia’s borders. These concerns contributed to the statement that Russia might use nuclear weapons if its national survival were threatened. For many in Russia, NATO’s air campaign in Kosovo in 1999 underlined Russia’s growing weakness and NATO’s increasing willingness to threaten Russian interests. Its National Security Concept published in 2000 noted that the level and scope of the military threat to Russia was growing. It cited, specifically, as a fundamental threat to its security, “the desire of some states and international associations to diminish the role of existing mechanisms for ensuring international security.” There are also threats in the border sphere. “A vital task of the Russian Federation is to exercise deterrence to prevent aggression on any scale and nuclear or otherwise, against Russia and its allies.” Consequently, Russia concluded that it “should possess nuclear forces that are capable of guaranteeing the infliction of the desired extent of damage against any aggressor state or coalition of states in any conditions and circumstances.”92 The debate over the role of nuclear weapons in Russia’s national security strategy in the late 1990s considered both strategic and nonstrategic nuclear weapons. With concerns focused on 88 David Nowak, “Report: Russia to allow Pre-emptive Nukes,” Associated Press, October 14, 2009. 89 Text of the New Russian Military Doctrine, Available at Opensource.gov, February 5, 2010. 90 Nikolai Sokov, The new, 2010 Russian Military Doctrine: The Nuclear Angle, Center for Nonproliferation Studies, CNS Feature Story, Monterey, CA, February 5, 2010. 91 Pavel Podvig, “New Russian Doctrine and Preventive Nuclear Strikes,” Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces, October 14, 2009, http://russianforces.org/blog/2009/10/new_russian_doctrine_and_preve.shtml. 92 “2000 Russian National Security Concept,” Nezavisimoye Voennaye Obozreniye, January 14, 2000. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 25 threats emerging around the borders of the former Soviet Union, analysts specifically considered whether nonstrategic nuclear weapons could substitute for conventional weaknesses in regional conflicts. The government appeared to resolve this debate in favor of the modernization and expansion of nonstrategic nuclear weapons in 1999, shortly after the conflict in Kosovo. During a meeting of the Kremlin Security Council, Russia’s President Yeltsin and his security chiefs reportedly agreed “that Moscow should develop and deploy tactical, as well as, strategic nuclear weapons.”93 Vladimir Putin, who was then chairman of the Security Council, stated that President Yeltsin had endorsed “a blueprint for the development and use of nonstrategic nuclear weapons.”94 Many analysts in the United States interpreted this development, along with questions about Russia’s implementation of its obligations under the 1991 PNI, to mean that Russia was “walking back” from its obligation to withdraw and eliminate nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Others drew a different conclusion. One Russian analyst speculated that the documents approved in 1999 focused on the development of operations plans that would allow Russia to conduct “limited nuclear war with strategic means in order to deter the enemy, requiring the infliction of pre-planned, but limited damage.”95 Specifically, he argued that Russia planned to seek a new generation of nonstrategic, or low-yield, warheads that could be to be delivered by strategic launchers. Others believe Russia has also pursued the modernization of existing nonstrategic nuclear weapons and development of new nuclear warheads for shorter-range nuclear missiles. The potential threat from NATO remained a concern for Russia in its 2010 and 2014 military doctrines.96 The 2010 doctrine stated that the main external military dangers to Russia are “the desire to endow the force potential of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) with global functions carried out in violation of the norms of international law and to move the military infrastructure of NATO member countries closer to the borders of the Russian Federation, including by expanding the bloc.” It also noted that Russia was threatened by “the deployment of troop contingents of foreign states (groups of states) on the territories of states contiguous with the Russian Federation and its allies and also in adjacent waters.” The 2014 doctrine repeated these concerns. Hence, Russia views NATO troops in nations near Russia’s borders as a threat to Russian security. This concern extends to U.S. missile defense assets that may be deployed on land in Poland and Romania and at sea near Russian territory as a part of the European Phased Adaptive Approach (EPAA). In an environment where Russia also has doubts about the effectiveness of its conventional forces, its doctrine allows for the possible use of nonstrategic nuclear weapons during a local or regional conflict on its periphery. The doctrines do not say that Russia would use nuclear weapons to preempt such an attack, but it does reserve the right to use them in response.97 Although Russia does not use the phrase in any of these recent versions of its military doctrine, analysts both inside and outside the U.S. government often refer to this approach as the “escalate 93 Martin Nesirky, “Focus: Nuclear-power Russia Wants Tactical Weapons,” Reuters, April 29, 1999. 94 David Hoffman, “Kremlin to Bolster Nuclear Stockpile, Government Fears Short-Range Missiles May Be Inadequate,” Washington Post, April 30, 1999, p. 19. 95 Ivan Safranchik, “Tactical Nuclear Weapons in the Modern World: A Russian Perspective,” in Alexander and Millar, Tactical Nuclear Weapons, p. 54. 96 Text of the New Russian Military Doctrine, Available at Opensource.gov, February 5, 2010. See, also, Dmitri Trenin, 2014: Russia's New Military Doctrine Tells All, Carnegie Moscow Center, Moscow, December 29, 2014, https://carnegie.ru/commentary/57607. 97 Vladimir Dvorkin, Nuclear Weapons in Russia's Amended Military Doctrine, Carnegie Moscow Center, Moscow, January 22, 2015, https://carnegie.ru/commentary/58774. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 26 to de-escalate” doctrine.98 Russian statements, when combined with military exercises that seemed to simulate the use of nuclear weapons against NATO members, led many to believe that Russia might threaten to use its nonstrategic nuclear weapons to coerce or intimidate its neighbors. These threats could occur prior to the start of a conflict, or within a conflict if Russia believed that the threat to use nuclear weapons might lead its adversaries (including the United States and its allies) to back down.99 This doctrine, when combined with recent Russian statements designed to remind others of the strength of Russia’s nuclear deterrent, seemed to indicate that Russia has increased the role of nuclear weapons in its military strategy and military planning.100 The 2018 Nuclear Posture Review adhered to the view that Russia had adopted such a strategy and asserted that Russia “mistakenly assesses that the threat of nuclear escalation or actual first use of nuclear weapons would serve to ‘de-escalate’ a conflict on terms favorable to Russia.”101 This view underlines the NPR’s recommendations for the United States to develop new low-yield nonstrategic weapons that, it argues, would provide the United States with a credible response, thereby “ensuring that the Russian leadership does not miscalculate regarding the consequences of limited nuclear first use.”102 Force Structure It is difficult to estimate the number of nonstrategic nuclear weapons in the Russian arsenal. This uncertainty stems from several factors: uncertainty about the number of nonstrategic nuclear weapons that the Soviet Union had stored and deployed in 1991, when President Gorbachev announced his PNI; uncertainty about the pace of reductions in these systems and numbers of warheads eliminated from the Russian arsenal; the addition of significant numbers of new dual-capable delivery systems to Russia’s forces structure; and uncertainty about the numbers of warheads for available for deployment on these dual-capable delivery systems. Analysts estimate that the Soviet Union may have deployed 15,000-25,000 nonstrategic nuclear weapons, or more, in the late 1980s and early 1990s. During the 1990s, Russian officials stated publicly that they had completed the weapons withdrawals mandated by the PNIs and had proceeded to eliminate warheads at a rate of 2,000 per year.103 However, many experts doubt these statements, noting that Russia probably lacked the financial and technical means to proceed this quickly. In addition, Russian officials have offered a moving deadline for this process in their public statements. For example, at the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty review conference in 98 For a more detailed discussion of Russian nuclear doctrine, see CRS Report R45861, Russia’s Nuclear Weapons: Doctrine, Forces, and Modernization, by Amy F. Woolf. 99 For a detailed description of Russia’s strategy, see Nikolai N. Sokov, “Why Russia calls a limited nuclear strike ‘de-escalation,’” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, March 2014, http://thebulletin.org/why-russia-calls-limited-nuclear-strike-de-escalation. 100 Robin Emmott, “Risk of Nuclear War in Europe Growing, warns Russian Ex-Minister,” Reuters, March 21, 2016. See, also, Yasmin Tadjdeh, “State Dept. Official: Russian Nuclear Disarmament Must Continue,” National Defense, March 23, 2016. 101 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, p. 8, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. 102 Ibid. p. 30. 103 Lewis Dunn, “Non-strategic Nuclear Weapons Control: What is the Problem?,” in Larsen, Jeffrey A. and Kurt J. Klingenberger, editors, Controlling Non-Strategic Nuclear Weapons: Obstacles and Opportunities, United States Air Force, Institute for National Security Studies, July 2001, p. 17. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 27 2000, Russian Foreign Minister Ivanov stated that Russia was about to finish implementing its PNIs. But, at a follow-up meeting two years later, Russian officials stated that the elimination process was continuing, and, with adequate funding, could be completed by the end of 2004.104 In 2007, an official from Russia’s Ministry of Defense stated that Russia had completed the elimination of all of the warheads for its ground forces, 60% of its missile defense warheads, 50% of its air force warheads, and 30% of its naval warheads.105 In 2010, the Russian government revised this number and said it had reduced its nonstrategic nuclear weapons inventory by 75%.106 In 2003, General Yuri Baluyevsky, who was then the first deputy chief of staff of the Russian General Staff, stated that Russia would not destroy all of its tactical nuclear weapons and that it would, instead, “hold on to its stockpiles” in response to U.S. plans to develop new types of nuclear warheads.107 General Nikolai Makarov, head of the Russian General Staff, made a similar comment in 2008. He said that Russia would “keep nonstrategic nuclear forces as long as Europe is unstable and packed with armaments.”108 Russia has also reportedly reduced the number of military bases that could deploy nonstrategic nuclear weapons and has consolidated its storage areas for these weapons. According to unclassified estimates, the Soviet Union may have had 500-600 storage sites for nuclear warheads in 1991. By the end of the decade, this number may have declined to about 100. In the past 10 years, Russia may have further consolidated its storage sites for nuclear weapons, retaining around 50 in operation.109 With consideration for the uncertainties in estimates of Russian nonstrategic nuclear forces, some sources indicate Russia may have had up to 4,000 warheads for nonstrategic nuclear weapons earlier in this decade.110 In its 2009 report, the congressionally mandated Strategic Posture Commission indicated that Russia may have had around 3,800 operational nonstrategic nuclear weapons.111 This number may exclude warheads slated for retirement. A more recent estimate indicates that “Russia might have roughly 1,870 nuclear warheads for delivery by launchers that are considered nonstrategic or tactical.”112 The authors calculate that, within this total, Russia’s navy maintains about 820 warheads for “cruise missiles, antisubmarine rockets, antiaircraft missiles, torpedoes, and depth charges.” The Air Force may have 530 nuclear warheads available for delivery by fighters and bombers. The Army may have 80-100 warheads for short-range missiles and artillery. Some 380 of Russia’s nonstrategic nuclear warheads may also be allocated to Russia’s air and missile defense forces. 104 Joshua Handler, in Alexander and Millar, Tactical Nuclear Weapons, p. 29. 105 Robert S. Norris and Hans M. Kristensen, “Russian Nuclear Forces, 2010,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, January/February 2010, p. 79. 106 Hans M. Kristensen and Robert S. Norris, “Russian Nuclear Forces, 2011,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, vol. 67, no. 3 (May/June 2011), p. 71. 107 Vladimir Isachenkov, “U.S. Nuke Development Concerns Russia,” Interfax, November 26, 2003. 108 “Russian Military Chief Defends Nonstrategic Nukes,” Global Security Newswire, December 17, 2008. 109 Hans M. Kristensen, Non-Strategic Nuclear Weapons, Federation of American Scientists, Special Report No. 3, Washington, DC, May 2012, p. 68, http://www.fas.org/_docs/Non_Strategic_Nuclear_Weapons.pdf. 110 U.S. Congress, House Armed Services Committee Hearing. James Miller, Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, Prepared Statement, November 2, 2011, p. 2. 111 William J. Perry, Chairman and James R. Schlesinger, Vice Chairman, America’s Strategic Posture, The Final Report of the Congressional Commission on the Strategic Posture of the United States, Washington, DC, April 2009, p. 111, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/file/strat_posture_report_adv_copy.pdf. 112 Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Russian Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, March 9, 2020, p. 104, https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00963402.2020.1728985. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 28 Another source, using a different methodology, concluded that Russia may have half that amount, or only 1,000 operational warheads for nonstrategic nuclear weapons.113 This estimate concluded that Russia might retain up to 210 warheads for its ground forces, up to 166 warheads for its air and missile defense forces, 334 warheads for its air force, and 330 warheads for its naval forces.114 Where past studies calculated the number of operational warheads by combining estimates of reductions from Cold War levels with assessments of the number of nuclear-capable units and delivery systems remaining in Russia’s force structure, this author focused on the number of operational units and the likely number of nuclear warheads needed to achieve their assigned missions. The 2018 Nuclear Posture Review affirmed that Russia maintains and is modernizing “an active stockpile of up to 2,000 non-strategic nuclear weapons.”115 Others, however, argue that Russia is increasing its numbers of nonstrategic nuclear weapons, in part because it is modernizing and adding to its force of dual-capable delivery systems. For example, Lieutenant General Robert P. Ashley, the Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, noted in a speech in May 2019 that Russia’s stockpile of nonstrategic nuclear weapons is “already large and diverse” and “is being modernized with an eye towards greater accuracy, longer ranges, and lower yields to suit their potential warfighting role.”116 General Ashley also listed a wide range of systems included in this modernization effort, including short- and close-range ballistic missiles, ground-launched cruise missiles, antiship and antisubmarine missiles, torpedoes, and depth charges. There is widespread agreement that Russia is pursuing a broad-based modernization program for its nonstrategic nuclear weapons, although experts disagree on the pace, direction, and rationale for this program. Some sources assert that this effort appears to “involve phasing out Soviet-era weapons and replacing them with newer but fewer arms.”117 Some argue that Russia will retire more of these weapons than it acquires as it develops more capable advanced conventional weapons. Others, however, see Russia’s modernization of its nonstrategic nuclear weapons as a partner to its “escalate to de-escalate” nuclear doctrine and argue that Russia will expand its nonstrategic nuclear forces as it raises their profile in its doctrine and war-fighting plans. The 2018 Nuclear Posture Review notes that Russia is “building a large, diverse, and modern set of non-strategic systems that ... may be armed with nuclear or conventional weapons.” The NPR argues that Russia is “increasing the total number of such weapons in its arsenal, while significantly improving its delivery capabilities.”118 The 2018 NPR also noted that one of Russia’s new nonstrategic nuclear weapons is a ground-launched cruise missile with a range between 500 and 5,000 kilometers, which makes it a 113 See Igor Sutyagin, Atomic Accounting: A New Estimate of Russia’s Non-strategic Nuclear Forces, Royal United Services Institute, Occasional Paper, London, November 2012, p. 3, https://rusi.org/sites/default/files/201211_op_atomic_accounting.pdf. 114 Ibid., p. 73. 115 U.S. Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Report, Washington, DC, February 2018, p. 58, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. 116 Lt. Gen. Robert P. Ashley Jr., “Russian and Chinese Nuclear Modernization Trends,” Remarks at the Hudson Institute, May 29, 2019, https://www.dia.mil/News/Speeches-and-Testimonies/Article-View/Article/1859890/russianand-chinese-nuclear-modernization-trends/. 117 Hans M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Russian Nuclear Forces, 2020,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, March 9, 2020, p. 111, https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00963402.2020.1728985. 118 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, D.C., February 2, 2018, p. 9, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 29 violation of the 1987 INF Treaty. The Obama Administration had first reported that Russia was in violation of INF in 2014, in the State Department’s Report on Adherence to and Compliance with Arms Control, Nonproliferation, and Disarmament Agreements and Commitments.119 According to the 2017 report, Russia began deploying the missile, now known as the 9M729, in late 2016.120 Changing the Focus of the Debate The preceding sections of this report focus exclusively on U.S. and Soviet/Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons. These weapons were an integral part of the Cold War standoff between the two nations. The strategy and doctrine that would have guided their use and the numbers of deployed weapons both figured into calculations about the possibility that a conflict between the two nations might escalate to a nuclear exchange. Other nations—including France, Great Britain, and China—also had nuclear weapons, but these did not affect the central conflict of the Cold War in the same way as U.S. and Soviet forces. The end of the Cold War, however, and the changing international security environment during the past 30 years, has rendered incomplete any discussion of nonstrategic nuclear weapons that is limited to U.S. and Russian forces. Because both these nations maintain weapons and plans for their use, the relationship between the two nations could still affect the debate about these weapons. In addition, Russian officials have turned to these weapons as a part of their response to concerns about a range of U.S. and NATO policies. Nevertheless, both these nations have looked beyond their mutual relationship when considering possible threats and responses that might include the use of nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Both nations have highlighted the threat of the possible use of nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons by other potential adversaries or nonstate actors. Both have indicated that they might use nuclear weapons to deter or respond to threats from other nations. This theme is evident in the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review, which calls for the deployment of a new sea-launched cruise missile to address the threat, at least in part, to U.S. allies from the missile and nuclear programs in North Korea. In addition, a debate about nonstrategic nuclear weapons could cover more than just the U.S. and Russian arsenals. For example, India and Pakistan might also resort to nuclear weapons use in the event of a conflict. If measured by the range of delivery vehicles and the yield of the warheads, these nations’ weapons could be considered to be nonstrategic. But each nation could plan to use these weapons in either strategic or nonstrategic roles. Both nations continue to review and revise their nuclear strategies, leaving many questions about the potential role for nuclear weapons in future conflicts. Pakistan, in particular, has considered deploying short-range tactical nuclear weapons with forward-deployed forces, with the intention of using them on the battlefield to blunt a possible Indian attack. China also has nuclear weapons with ranges and missions that could be considered nonstrategic. Many analysts have expressed concerns about the potential for the use of nuclear weapons in a conflict over Taiwan or other areas of China’s interests. This report does not review the nuclear weapons programs in these nations.121 However, when 119 U.S. Department of State, Adherence to and Compliance with Arms Control, Nonproliferation, and Disarmament Agreements and Commitments, Washington, DC, July 2014, pp. 8-10, http://www.state.gov/t/avc/rls/rpt/2014/230047.htm. 120 For details on Russia’s noncompliance with the INF Treaty, see CRS Report R43832, Russian Compliance with the Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty: Background and Issues for Congress, by Amy F. Woolf. 121 For a more detailed discussion of Indian, Pakistani, and Chinese nonstrategic nuclear weapons, see Alexander, Brian and Alistair Millar, editors, Tactical Nuclear Weapons, op cit. See also, Toshi Yoshihara and James R. Holmes, eds. Strategy in the Second Nuclear Age (Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 2012). See, also, Hans. M. Kristensen and Matt Korda, “Tactical Nuclear Weapons, 2019,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, August 30, 2019, pp. 259-260, https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00963402.2019.1654273?needAccess=true. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 30 reviewing the issues raised by, problems attributed to, and solutions proposed for nonstrategic nuclear weapons, the report acknowledges the role played by the weapons of these other nations. Issues for Congress During the 2010 debate on the New START Treaty, many Senators expressed concerns about Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons. They noted that these weapons were not covered by New START, that Russia possessed a far greater number of these weapons than did the United States, and that Russia’s nonstrategic nuclear weapons might be vulnerable to theft or sale to other nations seeking nuclear weapons. In 2014, after Russia annexed Crimea, some Members also raised concerns about the possibility that Russia might deploy these weapons in that region, bringing them closer to the borders of some NATO allies. Russia’s Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov ignited these concerns in December 2014, when he noted that Russia had a right to put nuclear weapons in Crimea because Crimea was now a part of Russia.122 The 2018 Nuclear Posture Review continued to highlight concerns about Russia’s nonstrategic nuclear weapons and linked proposed changes in U.S. nuclear forces—including the development of a new low-yield warhead for submarine launched ballistic missiles and new sea-launched cruise missile—to Russia’s apparent nuclear doctrine and the modernization of its nonstrategic nuclear forces. The Trump Administration has also indicated that it would like to limit Russia’s nonstrategic nuclear weapons in any future arms control treaty. During the 2010 debates prior to the completion of NATO’s new Strategic Concept, analysts and government officials also raised many issues about U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons. These debates focused on questions about whether NATO should continue to rely on nuclear weapons to ensure its security and whether the United States should continue to deploy nonstrategic nuclear weapons at bases in Europe. Many of the discussions that focused on Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons and many of those that focused on U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons reached a similar conclusion—there was widespread agreement about the need for further cooperation between the United States and Russia in containing, controlling, and possibly reducing nonstrategic nuclear weapons. The 112th Congress reiterated its support for this agenda, when in the FY2013 Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 4310, §1037) it indicated that “the United States should pursue negotiations with the Russian Federation aimed at the reduction of Russian deployed and nondeployed nonstrategic nuclear forces.” The tone of the discussion has changed in recent years, following Russia’s annexation of Crimea, its support for separatists in Ukraine, and its military maneuvers near NATO nations. There is little discussion of possible reductions in U.S. nuclear weapons in Europe and declining interest in pursuing transparency and confidence-building measures with Russia. Instead, while the prospects for cooperation with Russia seem limited, particularly in light of its reported violation of the INF Treaty, NATO has taken steps to bolster its nuclear capabilities and the United States is considering the deployment of new nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Safety and Security of Russian Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Russia’s continued deployment of nonstrategic nuclear weapons has, in past years, raised concerns about their safety and security in storage areas and a possible lack of central control over their use when deployed in the field. Russia deployed these weapons, and continues to store many of them, at remote bases close to potential battlefields and far from the central command 122 Sergei L. Loiko, “Russia says it has a right to put nuclear weapons in Crimea,” Los Angeles Times, December 15, 2014. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 31 authority in Moscow. The economic chaos in Russia during the 1990s raised questions about the stability and reliability of the troops charged with monitoring and securing these weapons and fostered concerns about the possibility that the weapons might be lost, stolen, or sold to other nations or groups seeking nuclear weapons.123 Although economic conditions improved, these concerns persisted a decade later. During comments made after a speech in October 2008, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates stated that he was worried that the Russians did not know the numbers or locations of “old land mines, nuclear artillery shells, and so on” that might be of interest to rogue states or terrorists.124 Russian officials have denied that they might lose control over their nonstrategic nuclear weapons and they contend that the problems of the 1990s were resolved as the weapons were withdrawn to central storage areas.125 Moreover, there is no public evidence from Western sources about any episodes of lost, sold, or stolen Russian nuclear weapons. The Role of Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons in Russia’s National Security Policy As was noted above, many analysts argue that Russia’s nonstrategic nuclear weapons pose a risk to the United States, its allies, and others because Russia has altered its national security concept and military strategies, increasing its reliance on nuclear weapons. Some fear that Russia might resort to the early use of nuclear weapons in a conflict along its periphery, which could lead to a wider conflict and the possible involvement of troops from NATO or other neighboring countries, possibly drawing in new NATO members. Some also believe that Russia could threaten NATO with its nonstrategic nuclear weapons because Russia sees NATO as a threat to its security. Russian analysts and officials have argued that NATO enlargement—with the possible deployment of nuclear weapons and missile defense capabilities on the territories of new NATO members close to Russia’s borders—demonstrates how much NATO could threaten Russia. The 2008 congressionally mandated Strategic Posture Commission expressed a measure of concern about the military implications of Russia’s nonstrategic nuclear forces. It noted that Russia “stores thousands of these weapons in apparent support of possible military operations west of the Urals.” It further noted that the current imbalance between U.S. and Russian nonstrategic nuclear warheads is “worrisome to some U.S. allies in Central Europe.” It argued that this imbalance, and the allies’ worries, could become more pronounced in the future if the United States and Russia continue to reduce their numbers of deployed strategic nuclear weapons.126 Others have argued, however, that regardless of Russia’s rhetoric, “Russia’s theater nuclear weapons are not ... destabilizing.” Even if modernized, these weapons will not “give Moscow the 123 “Because of their size and forward basing, they are especially vulnerable to theft and unauthorized use.” See William C. Potter and Nikolai Sokov, “Nuclear Weapons that People Forget,” International Herald Tribune, May 31, 2000. 124 Walter Pincus, “Gates Suggests New Arms Deal With Russia,” Washington Post, October 29, 2008, p. A9. 125 Russia’s defense minister, Sergei Ivanov, has said that Russia’s nuclear arsenal is safe and militants could never steal an atomic bomb from the country. He further noted that it is a myth that “Russian nuclear weapons are guarded badly and weakly.” See “Russia Says No Militant Threat to Nuclear Arsenal,” Reuters, August 3, 2004. 126 William J. Perry, Chairman and James R. Schlesinger, Vice Chairman, America’s Strategic Posture, The Final Report of the Congressional Commission on the Strategic Posture of the United States, Washington, DC, April 2009, p. 21, https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/file/strat_posture_report_adv_copy.pdf. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 32 capability to alter the strategic landscape.”127 Further, Russian weapons, even with its new military strategy, may not pose a threat to NATO or U.S. allies. Russia’s doctrine indicates that it would use these weapons in response to a weak performance by its conventional forces in an ongoing conflict. Since it would be unlikely for NATO to be involved in a conventional conflict with Russia, it would also be unlikely for Russian weapons to find targets in NATO nations. This does not, however, preclude their use in other conflicts along Russia’s periphery. As Russian documents indicate, Russia could use these weapons if its national survival were at stake. This view, however, has been tempered, in recent years, by both Russia’s aggression in Ukraine and its frequent “nuclear saber-rattling.” Not only have Russian officials reminded others of the existence and relevance of Russian nuclear weapons, Russian military exercises, bomber flights, and cruise missile launches have seemed designed to demonstrate Russia’s capabilities and, possibly, its willingness to challenge NATO’s eastern members. These actions have raised concerns about the possibility that Russia might threaten to use nuclear weapons during a crisis with NATO, in line with its apparent “escalate to de-escalate” strategy, to force a withdrawal by NATO forces defending an exposed ally or to terminate a conflict on terms favorable to Russia. While some analysts dispute this interpretation of Russia’s doctrine, most agree that nonstrategic nuclear weapons appear to play a significant role in Russia’s doctrine and war plans.128 The Role of Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons in U.S. National Security Policy The Bush Administration argued, after the 2001 Nuclear Posture Review, that the United States had reduced its reliance on nuclear weapons by increasing the role of missile defenses and precision conventional weapons in the U.S. deterrent posture. At the same time, though, the Administration indicated that the United States would acquire and maintain those capabilities that it needed to deter and defeat any nation with the potential to threaten the United States, particularly if the potential adversary possessed weapons of mass destruction. It noted that these new, threatening capabilities could include hardened and deeply buried targets and, possibly, bunkers holding chemical or biological weapons. It indicated that the United States would seek to develop the capabilities to destroy these types of facilities. Using a similar construct, the Obama Administration, in the 2010 Nuclear Posture Review, also indicated that the United States would reduce the role of nuclear weapons in U.S. regional deterrence strategies by increasing its reliance on missile defenses and precision conventional weapons. Unlike the Bush Administration, however, the Obama Administration did not seek to acquire new nuclear weapons capabilities or to extend U.S. nuclear deterrence to threats from nations armed with chemical or biological weapons. It stated that it would not consider the use of nuclear weapons in response to conventional, chemical, or biological attack if the attacking nation were in compliance with its nuclear nonproliferation obligations. Instead, in such circumstances, the United States would deter and respond to attacks with missile defenses and advanced conventional weapons. In addition, the Administration announced that it planned to retire the Navy’s nuclear-armed, sea-launched cruise missiles, which had been part of the U.S. extended deterrent to allies in Asia. Nevertheless, the Administration pledged to retain and modernize the 127 Robert Joseph, “Nuclear Weapons and Regional Deterrence,” in Larson, Jeffrey A. and Kurt J. Klingenberger, editors, Controlling Non-Strategic Nuclear Weapons: Obstacles and Opportunities, United States Air Force, Institute for National Security Studies, July 2001. pp. 90-92. 128 Olya Oliker, Russia’s Nuclear Doctrine; What We Know, What We Don’t, and What That Means, CSIS, Washington, DC, May 5, 2016, https://www.csis.org/analysis/russia%E2%80%99s-nuclear-doctrine. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 33 B-61 warheads, carried by U.S. tactical fighters and bombers; these are also a part of the U.S. extended deterrent. Some questioned the wisdom of this change in policy. They recognized that the United States would only threaten the use of nuclear weapons in the most extreme circumstances, but they argued that, by taking these weapons “off the table” in some contingencies, the United States might allow some adversaries to conclude that they could threaten the United States without fear of an overwhelming response.129 The Obama Administration argued, however, that although it was taking the nuclear option off the table in some cases, this change would not undermine the U.S. ability to deter attacks from non-nuclear nations because the United States maintained the capability to respond to attacks from these nations with overwhelming conventional force. According to Under Secretary of State Ellen Tauscher, “we retain the prospect of using devastating conventional force to deter and respond to any aggression, especially if they were to use chemical or biological weapons. No one should doubt our resolve to hold accountable those responsible for such aggression, whether those giving the orders or carrying them out. Deterrence depends on the credibility of response. A massive and potential conventional response to non-nuclear aggression is highly credible.”130 Questions about the role of U.S. nuclear weapons in regional contingencies have resurfaced in recent years, as analysts have sought to understand how these weapons might affect a conflict with a regional ally armed with nuclear weapons.131 Some analysts doubt that U.S. nuclear weapons would play any role in such a contingency, unless used in retaliation after an adversary used a nuclear weapon against the United States or an ally, because U.S. conventional forces should be sufficient to achieve most conceivable military objectives.132 Others, however, argue that the United States might need to threaten the use of nuclear weapons, and possibly even employ those weapons, when facing an adversary seeking to use its own nuclear capabilities to intimidate the United States or coerce it to withdraw support for a regional ally. Some have suggested, specifically, that forward-deployed nuclear weapons with lower yields—in other words, nonstrategic nuclear weapons—might serve as a more credible deterrent threat in these circumstances.133 The 2018 Nuclear Posture Review adopted this perspective, and seemed to discount the approach, taken in both the Bush and Obama NPRs, of reducing the role of nuclear weapons by expanding the role and options available with advanced conventional weapons. It did not completely dismiss the value of U.S. conventional capabilities, but asserted that “conventional forces alone are inadequate to assure many allies who rightly place enormous value on U.S. extended nuclear deterrence for their security.”134 These concerns were central to the NPR’s recommendation that 129 Statement of Rep. Buck McKeon, ranking Member, U.S. Congress, House Armed Services, U.S. Nuclear Weapons Policy, Hearing, 111th Cong., 2nd sess., April 14, 2010. 130 Statement of Ellen O. Tauscher, Under Secretary of State for Arms Control and International Security. U.S. Congress, Senate Armed Services, The Nuclear Posture Review, 111th Cong., 2nd sess., April 22, 2010. 131 For varied views on this issue, see Clark Murdock, et al. Project Atom: A Competitive Strategies Approach to Defining U.S. Nuclear Strategy and Posture for 2025-2050, CSIS, Washington, DC, May 2015, http://csis.org/files/publication/150716_Murdock_ProjectAtom_Web_Rev2.pdf. 132 See, for example, Barry Blechman and Russell Rumbaugh, “Protecting U.S. Security by Minimizing the Role of Nuclear Weapons: A New U.S. Nuclear Policy, in Clark Murdock, et al. Project Atom: A Competitive Strategies Approach to Defining U.S. Nuclear Strategy and Posture for 2025-2050, CSIS, Washington, DC, May 2015. http://csis.org/files/publication/150716_Murdock_ProjectAtom_Web_Rev2.pdf. 133 Keir A. Lieber and Daryl G. Press, “The Nukes We Need: Preserving the American Deterrent,” Foreign Affairs, November/December 2009. See also, Elbridge Colby, “America Must Prepare for “Limited War,” National Interest, November/December 2015. 134 Ibid., p. 17. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 34 the United States develop two new types of nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Where the two previous NPRs sought to fill “gaps” in deterrence with ballistic missile defenses and advanced conventional weapons, the 2018 NPR asserted that new nuclear weapons were needed for this purpose. The Role of Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons in NATO Policy and Alliance Strategy For years after the collapse of the Warsaw Pact and demise of the Soviet Union, analysts questioned whether the United States needed to continue to deploy nuclear weapons in Europe. During the Cold War, these weapons were a part of NATO’s effort to offset the conventional superiority of the Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact allies. Some argued that this role was no longer relevant following the collapse of the Soviet-era military and alliance structure. In addition, analysts argued that NATO conventional forces were far superior to those of Russia, and sufficient for NATO’s defense. However, NATO policy still views nonstrategic nuclear weapons as a deterrent to any potential adversary, and they also serve as a link among the NATO nations, with bases in several nations and shared responsibility for nuclear policy planning and decisionmaking. They also still serve as a visible reminder of the U.S. extended deterrent and assurance of its commitment to the defense of its allies. The United States, its allies, and analysts outside government engaged in a heated debate over the role of and need for U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons deployed in Europe in the months leading up to the completion of NATO’s Strategic Concept in November 2010. In early 2010, political leaders from several NATO nations—including Belgium, Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and Norway—called for the United States to remove these weapons from Europe. They argued that these weapons served no military purpose in Europe, and that their removal would demonstrate NATO’s commitment to the vision of a world free of nuclear weapons, a vision supported by President Obama in a speech he delivered in April 2009.135 Those who sought the weapons’ removal also argued that NATO could meet the political goals of shared nuclear responsibility in other ways, and that the United States could extend deterrence and ensure the security of its allies in Europe with conventional weapons, missile defenses, and longer-range strategic nuclear weapons.136 Moreover, some argue, because these weapons play no military or political role in Europe, they no longer serve as a symbol of alliance solidarity and cooperation.137 Others, however, including some officials in newer NATO nations, argued that U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons in Europe not only remained relevant militarily, in some circumstances, but that they were an essential indicator of the U.S. commitment to NATO security and solidarity. This argument has gained credence as some of the newer NATO allies, such as Poland and the Baltic states, feel threatened by Russia and its arsenal of nonstrategic nuclear weapons. They would 135 Kent Harris, “NATO Allies Want U.S. Nuclear Weapons out of Europe,” Stars and Stripes, European Edition, March 3, 2010. See, also, “Allied Bid for Obama to Remove U.S. European Nuclear Stockpile,” AFP, February 20, 2010. 136 Oliver Thranert, U.S. Nuclear Forces In Europe to Zero? Yes, But Not Yet, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Proliferation Analysis, Washington, DC, December 10, 2008. See, also, Wolfgang Ischinger and Ulrich Weisser, “ANTO and the Nuclear Umbrella,” New York Times, February 16, 2010. 137 Ian Davis and Oliver Meier, Don't Mention the Cold War: Lord Robertson’s Basil Fawlty Moment, NATO Watch, Berlin, February 12, 2010. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 35 view the withdrawal of U.S. nuclear weapons as a change in the U.S. and NATO commitment to their security.138 NATO foreign ministers addressed the issue of U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons during their meeting in Tallinn, Estonia, in April 2010. At this meeting, the allies sought to balance the views of those nations who sought NATO agreement on the removal of the weapons and those who argued that these weapons were still relevant to their security and to NATO’s solidarity. At the conclusion of the meeting, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said that the United States was not opposed to reductions in the number of U.S. nuclear weapons in Europe, but that the removal of these weapons should be linked to a reduction in the number of Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons.139 Moreover, according to a NATO spokesman, the foreign ministers had agreed that no nuclear weapons would be removed from Europe unless all 28 member states of NATO agreed. Some also question whether the United States and NATO might benefit from the removal of these weapons from bases in Europe for safety and security reasons. An Air Force review of nuclear surety and security practices, released in early 2008, identified potential security concerns for U.S. weapons stored at some bases in Europe.140 The problems were evident at some of the national bases, where the United States stores nuclear weapons for use by the host nation’s own aircraft, but not at U.S. air bases in Europe. The review noted that “host nation security at nuclear-capable units varies from country to country” and that most bases do not meet DOD’s security requirements. Some in Congress thought the United States should consider expanding its deployment of dual-capable aircraft and nuclear bombs into eastern NATO nations, in response to Russia’s aggression in Ukraine. They argued that such moves would demonstrate that “Russian actions will come at a price.”141 Some have also suggested that the United States consider deploying new nuclear-armed missiles in Europe, in response to Russia’s violation of the 1987 INF Treaty.142 There is little evidence that NATO requested, or would welcome, such deployments, even after the United States announced that it planned to withdraw from the INF Treaty. Some have argued that such steps could ignite a new arms race that could further undermine security in Europe. Others have noted that these weapons might be destabilizing if they were vulnerable to preemptive strikes.143 Moreover, NATO has adjusted its conventional force posture and operations in response to Russia’s actions in Ukraine. According to NATO documents, these changes, when backed by the strategic nuclear forces of the United States and United Kingdom, should help assure the eastern allies of NATO’s ability to defend them.144 138 Franklin Miller, George Robertson, and Kori Schake, Germany Opens Pandora’s Box, Centre for European Reform, Briefing Note, London, February 2010, p. 3. 139 “U.S. ties Removal of European Nukes to Russian Arms Cuts,” Global Security Newswire, April 23, 2010. 140 Air Force Blue Ribbon Review of Nuclear Weapons Policies and Procedures, February 8, 2008. 141 John T. Bennett, “Turner: Putin's Actions Must ‘Come With a Price,’” Defense News, January 22, 2015. 142 John Bolton and John Yoo, “An Obsolete Nuclear Treaty Even Before Russia Cheated,” Wall Street Journal, September 9, 2014, http://online.wsj.com/articles/john-bolton-and-john-yoo-an-obsolete-nuclear-treaty-even-before-russia-cheated-1410304847. 143 Lt. Gen. Robert Gard and Greg Terryn, “The Wrong Move: Adding Nuclear Weapons to the Russia-Ukraine Conflict,” Defense One, February 9, 2015, http://www.defenseone.com/ideas/2015/02/wrong-move-adding-nuclear-weapons-russia-ukraine-conflict/104940/. 144 North Atlantic Treaty Organization, NATO's Readiness Action Plan, Fact Sheet, February 2015, http://www.nato.int/nato_static_fl2014/assets/pdf/pdf_2015_02/20150205_1502-Factsheet-RAP-en.pdf. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 36 The Relationship Between Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons and U.S. Nonproliferation Policy The George W. Bush Administration stated that the U.S. nuclear posture adopted after the 2002 NPR, along with the research into the development of new types of nuclear warheads, would contribute to U.S. efforts to stem the proliferation of nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons. It argued that, by creating a more credible threat against the capabilities of nations that seek these weapons, the U.S. policy would deter their acquisition or deployment. It also reinforced the value of the U.S. extended deterrent to allies in Europe and Japan, thus discouraging them from acquiring their own nuclear weapons.145 Critics of the Bush Administration’s policy questioned whether the United States needed new nuclear weapons to deter the acquisition or use of WMD by other nations; as noted above, they claim that U.S. conventional weapons can achieve this objective. Further, many analysts claimed that the U.S. policy would actually spur proliferation, encouraging other countries to acquire their own WMD. Specifically, they noted that U.S. plans and programs could reinforce the view that nuclear weapons have military utility. If the world’s only conventional superpower needs more nuclear weapons to maintain its security, then it would be difficult for the United States to argue that other nations could not also benefit from these weapons. Such nations could also argue that nuclear weapons would serve their security interests. Consequently, according to the Bush Administration’s critics, the United States might ignite a new arms race if it pursued new types of nuclear weapons to achieve newly defined battlefield objectives.146 The Bush Administration countered this argument by noting that few nations acquire nuclear weapons in response to U.S. nuclear programs. They do so either to address their own regional security challenges, or to counter U.S. conventional superiority.147 The Obama Administration, in the 2010 Nuclear Posture Review, set out a different relationship between U.S. nuclear weapons policy and nonproliferation policy. The Bush Administration had indicated that a policy where the United States argued that it might use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear nations would discourage these nations from acquiring or using weapons of mass destruction. In other words, they could be attacked with nuclear weapons whether or not they had nuclear weapons of their own. The Obama Administration, however, argued that its adjustment to the U.S. declaratory policy—where it indicated that it would not use U.S. nuclear weapons to threaten or attack nations who did not have nuclear weapons and were in compliance with their nonproliferation obligations—would discourage their acquisition of nuclear weapons. Nations that did not yet have nuclear weapons would know that they could be added to the U.S. nuclear target list if they acquired them. And others, like Iran and North Korea, who were already pursuing nuclear weapons, would know that, if they disbanded their programs, they could be removed from the U.S. nuclear target list. 145 An Assessment of the Impact of Repeal of the Prohibition on Low Yield Warhead Development on the Ability of the United States to Achieve its Nonproliferation Objectives, jointly submitted to the Congress by the Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense, and Secretary of Energy, March 2004, p. 4. 146 “The long term consequences of developing new nuclear weapons might well be to push Iran, North Korea, and other states to work harder and faster in developing and manufacturing their own nukes.” See William Arkin, “New Nukes? No Way,” Los Angeles Times, August 17, 2003. 147 An Assessment of the Impact of Repeal of the Prohibition on Low Yield Warhead Development on the Ability of the United States to Achieve its Nonproliferation Objectives, jointly submitted to the Congress by the Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense, and Secretary of Energy, March 2004, p. 4. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 37 The 2018 Nuclear Posture Review explicitly stated that “credible U.S. extended nuclear deterrence will continue to be a cornerstone of U.S. non-proliferation efforts.”148 Many analysts have argued that, if allies were not confident in the reliability and credibility of the U.S. nuclear arsenal, they may feel compelled to acquire their own nuclear weapons. Such calculations might be evident in Japan and South Korea, as they face threats or intimidation from nuclear-armed neighbors like China and North Korea. In recent years, some politicians in South Korea have called for the return of U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons to the peninsula, or even South Korea’s development of its own nuclear capability, as a response to North Korea’s development and testing of nuclear weapons.149 This view has not received the support of the current government in South Korea, but it does demonstrate that some may see U.S. security guarantees as fragile. Many analysts note, however, that extended deterrence rests on more than just U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons. For example, in recent years the United States and South Korea have participated in the U.S.-ROK (Republic of Korea) Extended Deterrence Policy Committee and the United States and Japan have pursued the U.S.-Japan Extended Deterrence Dialogue to discuss issues related to regional security and to bolster the allies’ confidence in the U.S. commitment to their security. Moreover, the United States occasionally flies B-2 and B-52 bombers in joint exercises with South Korea to demonstrate its ability to project power, if needed, into a conflict in the area.150 Arms Control Options Concerns about the disparity between the numbers of U.S. and Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons have dominated discussions about possible arms control measures addressing nonstrategic nuclear weapons. But the United States and Russia have never employed their nonstrategic nuclear weapons to counter, or balance, the nonstrategic nuclear weapons of the other side. For NATO during the Cold War and for Russia in more recent years, these weapons have served to counter perceived weaknesses and an imbalance in conventional forces. As a result, there has been little interest, until recently, in calculating or creating a balance in the numbers of nonstrategic nuclear weapons.151 Some who have expressed a concern about the numerical imbalance in nonstrategic nuclear weapons argue that this imbalance could become more important as the United States and Russia reduce their numbers of strategic nuclear weapons. They fear that NATO nations located near Russia’s borders may feel threatened or intimidated by Russia’s nonstrategic nuclear weapons. They assert that Russia’s advantage in the numbers of these weapons, when combined with a reduction in U.S. strategic forces, could convince these nations that Russia was the rising power in the region, and that they should, therefore, accede to Russia’s political or economic pressure. Others, however, have questioned this logic. They agree that Russia’s ability to intimidate, and possibly attack, NATO nations on its periphery may be related to the capabilities of Russia’s conventional forces and the existence of Russia’s nuclear forces. But this ability would exist whether Russia had dozens or hundreds of nuclear weapons in the region. And NATO’s ability to 148 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, DC, February 2, 2018, p. 70, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. 149 Robert Marquand, “Amid Crisis, Influential South Korean politician wants to deploy US nukes,” Christian Science Monitor, April 9, 2013. See, also CRS Report R44950, Redeploying U.S. Nuclear Weapons to South Korea: Background and Implications in Brief, by Amy F. Woolf and Emma Chanlett-Avery. 150 Jay Solomon, Julian E. Barnes, and Alastair Gale, “North Korea Warned,” Wall Street Journal, March 29, 2013. 151 For a discussion of the possible politics of the recent concerns about this issue, see Hans M. Kristensen, Non-Strategic Nuclear Weapons, Federation of American Scientists, Special Report No. 3, Washington, DC, May 2012, pp. 40-41, http://www.fas.org/_docs/Non_Strategic_Nuclear_Weapons.pdf. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 38 resist Russian pressure and support vulnerable allies would be related more to its political cohesion and overall military capabilities than to the precise number of nuclear weapons that were deployed on European territory. Moreover, some note that, in spite of Russia’s advantage in the aggregate number on nonstrategic nuclear weapons, many of Russia’s weapons may be deployed at bases closer to its border with China than its borders with NATO nations, so many of these weapons should not count in the balance at all. Increase Transparency Many analysts have argued that the United States and Russia should, at a minimum, provide each other with information about their numbers of nonstrategic nuclear weapons and the status (i.e., deployed, stored, or awaiting dismantlement) of those weapons. According to one such article, “a crucial first step ... would be to ... agree on total transparency, verification, and the right to monitor changes and movement of the arsenal.”152 Such information might help each side to monitor the other’s progress in complying with the PNIs; it could also help resolve questions and concerns that might come up about the status of these weapons or their vulnerability to theft or misuse. The United States and Russia have discussed transparency measures for nuclear weapons in the past, in a separate forum in the early 1990s, and as a part of their discussions of the framework for a START III Treaty in the late 1990s. They failed to reach agreement on either occasion. Russia, in particular, has seemed unwilling to provide even basic information about its stockpile of nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Some in the United States resisted as well, arguing that public discussions about the numbers and locations of U.S. nuclear weapons in Europe could increase pressure on the United States to withdraw these weapons. After NATO completed its new Strategic Concept in 2010 and Deterrence and Defense Posture Review in 2012, many experts recognized that NATO was unlikely to approve reductions in U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons in Europe unless Russia agreed to similar reductions. As a result, in recent years, some again argued that NATO and Russia should focus on transparency and confidence-building measures as a way to ease concerns and build cooperation, before they seek to negotiate actual limits or reductions in nonstrategic nuclear weapons. They could begin, for example, with discussions about which types of weapons to include in the negotiation and what type of data to exchange on these weapons. Some have suggested, in addition, that the two nations could exchange information on the locations of storage facilities that no longer house these weapons, as a way to begin the process of building confidence and understanding. Those who support this approach argue that it would serve well as a first step, and could eventually lead to limits or reductions. Others, however, believe these talks might serve as a distraction, and, if the United States and Russia get bogged down in these details, they may never negotiate limits or reductions. Moreover, Russian officials seem equally as uninterested in transparency negotiations as they are in reductions at this time. Negotiate a Formal Treaty Over the years, some analysts have suggested that the United States and Russia negotiate a formal treaty to put limits and restrictions on each nation’s nonstrategic nuclear weapons. This was a central theme in the debate over the New START Treaty in late 2010. Not only did Members of the Senate call on the Obama Administration to pursue such negotiations, Administration officials noted often that the New START Treaty was just a first step and that the United States and Russia would pursue limits on nonstrategic nuclear weapons in talks on a subsequent agreement. This is 152 Catherine M. Kelleher and Scott L. Warren, “Getting to Zero Starts Here: Tactical Nuclear Weapons,” Arms Control Today, October 2009, p. 11. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 39 also a key theme in the Trump Administration’s approach to the future of arms control, with Administration officials arguing that New START is insufficient because it does not limit nonstrategic nuclear weapons. They note that the President wants to pursue an agreement that would limit all the weapons that can threaten the United States and its allies.153 Negotiations on a treaty to limit nonstrategic nuclear weapons could be complex, difficult, and very time-consuming.154 Given the large disparity in the numbers of U.S. and Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons, and given the different roles these weapons play in U.S. and Russian security strategy, it may be difficult to craft an agreement that not only reduces the numbers of weapons in an equitable way but also addresses the security concerns addressed by the retention of these weapons. A treaty that imposed an equal ceiling on each sides’ numbers of deployed nonstrategic weapons might appear equitable, but it would require sharp reductions in Russia’s forces with little impact on U.S. forces. A treaty that required each side to reduce its forces by an equal percentage would have a similar result, requiring far deeper reductions on Russia’s part.155 Even if the United States and Russia could agree on the depth of reductions to impose on these weapons, they may not be able to agree on which weapons would fall under the limit. For the United States, it may be relatively straightforward to identify the affected weapons—the limit could apply to the gravity bombs deployed in Europe and any spare weapons that may be stored in the United States. Russia, however, has many different types of nonstrategic nuclear weapons, including some that could be deployed on naval vessels, some that would be delivered by naval aircraft, and some that would be deployed with ground forces. Moreover, while many of these weapons might be deployed with units in western Russia, near Europe, others are located to the east, and would deploy with troops in a possible conflict with China. To address these problems, some analysts have suggested that the limits in the next arms control treaty cover all types of nuclear warheads—warheads deployed on strategic-range delivery vehicles, warheads deployed with tactical-range delivery vehicles, and nondeployed warheads held in storage.156 The Obama Administration reportedly considered this approach, and studied the contours of a treaty that would limit strategic, nonstrategic, and nondeployed nuclear warheads.157 This type of agreement would allow each side to determine, for itself, the size and mix of its forces, within the limits on total warheads.158 While this type of comprehensive agreement may seem to provide a solution to the imbalance between U.S. and Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons, it is not clear that, once the parties move beyond limits on just their deployed strategic weapons, they will be able to limit the scope of the 153 Kylie Atwood and Nicole Gaouette, “Trump admin aiming for major nuclear deal with Russia and China,” CNN, April 26, 2019, https://www.cnn.com/2019/04/25/politics/trump-nuclear-deal-russia-china/index.html. 154 Walter Pincus, “START Has Passed, But Tactical Arms Remain an Issue,” Washington Post, December 28, 2010, p. 11. See, also, Peter Baker, “Smaller Arms Next for U.S. and Russia,” New York Times, December 25, 2010, p. 4. 155 A proposal of this type can be found in Franklin Miller, George Robertson, and Kori Schake, Germany Opens Pandora’s Box, Centre for European Reform, Briefing Note, London, February 2010, p. 3. 156 See, for example, Steven Pifer, “After New START: What Next?,” Arms Control Today, December 2010. 157 “New START Follow-Up Talks Seen Addressing All U.S., Russian Nuclear Arms,” Global Security Newswire, February 13, 2012. 158 “The only way to get a real handle on NSNF security, and the relationship of these weapons to strategic arms control and the real military threats they pose (while maintaining some capability) is the warhead control route.” See Joseph F. Pilat, “Controlling Nonstrategic Nuclear Forces,” in Larson, Jeffrey A. and Kurt J. Klingenberger, editors, Controlling Non-Strategic Nuclear Weapons: Obstacles and Opportunities, United States Air Force, Institute for National Security Studies, July 2001, p. 243. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 40 treaty in this way. Each side has its own list of weapons that it finds threatening; each may seek to include these in a more comprehensive agreement. For example, Russian officials, including the Foreign Minister, Sergei Lavrov, have stated that a future arms control agreement should also include limits on missile defenses, strategic-range weapons that carry conventional warheads, and possibly weapons in space. Minister Lavrov stated, specifically, that it is impossible to discuss only one aspect of the problem at strategic parity and stability negotiations held in the modern world. It is impossible to ignore such aspects as non-nuclear strategic armaments, on which the United States is actively working, plans to deploy armaments in space, which we oppose actively, the wish to build global missile defense systems, and the imbalance of conventional armaments. It is possible to hold further negotiations only with due account of all these factors….”159 The United States has no interest in including these types of limits in the next agreement. Hence, it is not clear that the two sides would be able to agree on which issues and what weapons systems to include in a next round of arms control negotiations. Moreover, although President Medvedev agreed, in April 2009, that the United States and Russia should pursue more arms control reductions after completing New START, Russia may have little interest in limits on nonstrategic nuclear weapons. Russian officials have denied that their weapons pose a safety and security problem, and they still consider these weapons essential to Russian military strategy and national security. Prospects for Arms Control Most analysts agree that the United States and Russia are unlikely to make any progress on either limits or transparency measures related to nonstrategic nuclear weapons in the current environment. Russia’s annexation of Crimea, aggression against Ukraine, and violation of the INF Treaty have altered the security atmosphere in Europe and quieted calls among officials in NATO nations for reductions in these weapons. According to Obama Administration officials, the U.S. offer for further negotiations remained on the table through the end of the Administration, but “progress requires a willing partner and a conducive strategic environment.”160 The Trump Administration reiterated this point in the 2018 Nuclear Posture Review, noting that “progress in arms control is not an end in and of itself, and depends on the security environment and the participation of willing partners.”161 It emphasized, further, that neither of these conditions exist today, in light of Russia’s violation of numerous arms control agreements and its efforts to “change borders and overturn existing norms” in Crimea and eastern Ukraine. Nevertheless, the 2018 NPR suggested the contours of a possible future arms control agreement between the United States and Russia. When discussing the need for a new sea-launched cruise missile, the NPR notes that this missile would not only provide a “non-strategic regional presence” and “an assured response capability” to bolster the U.S. commitment to its allies’ defense, but would also provide “an INF-Treaty compliant response to Russia’s continuing Treaty violation.” Moreover, it seems to view the SLCM as a bargaining chip for a future negotiation: 159 “State Duma Passes New START Ratification Bill in Second Reading,” Itar-Tass, January 14, 2010. 160 Rose Gottemoeller, Under Secretary for Arms Control and International Security, U.S. Nuclear Arms Control Policy, U.S. Department of State, Remarks at the Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, December 18, 2014, https://2009-2017.state.gov/t/us/2014/235395.htm. 161 Department of Defense, Nuclear Posture Review, Washington, D.C., February 2, 2018, p. 73, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Feb/02/2001872886/-1/-1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service 41 If Russia returns to compliance with its arms control obligations, reduces its non-strategic nuclear arsenal, and corrects its other destabilizing behaviors, the United States may reconsider the pursuit of a SLCM. Indeed, U.S. pursuit of a SLCM may provide the necessary incentive for Russia to negotiate seriously a reduction of its non-strategic nuclear weapons, just as the prior Western deployment of intermediate-range nuclear forces in Europe led to the 1987 INF Treaty. As then Secretary of State George P. Shultz stated, “If the West did not deploy Pershing II and cruise missiles, there would be no incentive for the Soviets to negotiate seriously for nuclear weapons reductions. This last sentence is a reference to NATO’s 1979 Dual Track decision, which paved the way for the negotiation of the INF Treaty. In the late 1970s, the Soviet Union began to deploy a new intermediate-range ballistic missile—known as the SS-20—that threatened to upset stability in Europe and raised questions about the cohesion of NATO. As a result, in December 1979, NATO adopted a \"dual-track\" decision that sought to link the modernization of U.S. nuclear weapons in Europe with an effort to spur the Soviets to negotiate reductions in INF systems.162 In the first track, the United States and its NATO partners agreed to replace aging medium-range Pershing I ballistic missiles with a more accurate and longer-range Pershing II (P-II) while adding new ground-launched cruise missiles. In the second track, NATO agreed that the United States should attempt to negotiate limits with the Soviet Union on intermediate-range nuclear systems. The allies recognized that the Soviet Union was unlikely to negotiate limits on its missiles unless it faced a similar threat from intermediate-range systems based in Western Europe. Initially, the United States sought an agreement that would impose equal limits on both sides' intermediate-range missiles, but after several years of negotiations and significant changes in the global security environment, both nations agreed to a global ban on all land-based intermediate-range ballistic and cruise missiles. This agreement serves as an imperfect model for the offer contained in the 2018 NPR. The “dual-track” decision envisioned limits on similar systems—U.S. and Soviet intermediate-range missiles. The NPR offered to forgo the new U.S. SLCM in exchange for a longer list of Russian weapons and behaviors—it indicated that the United States might reconsider the SLCM program if Russia “returns to compliance with its arms control obligations, reduces its non-strategic nuclear arsenal, and corrects its other destabilizing behaviors.” In addition, the 1979 dual track decision sought to deploy new U.S. missiles in Europe, to balance an emerging Soviet threat to Europe. A U.S. offer to forgo the SLCM in negotiations with Russia could be inconsistent with the NPR’s insistence that this missile is critical to extended deterrence in Asia. Even if the United States sought to limit the agreement to missiles deployed in Europe, Russia might object by noting that the United States could easily move sea-launched cruise missiles deployed in Asia to locations closer to Russia (the INF Treaty addressed the problem of mobility by adopting a global ban on these missiles). Finally, as the United States and Soviet Union discovered when they negotiated the INF Treaty, the complexity of distinguishing between nuclear and conventional cruise missiles could necessitate a ban on all cruise missiles of a designated range. This would likely be inconsistent with the U.S. reliance on conventional SLCMs in conflicts around the world. Consequently, even with the potential opening for arms control in the 2018 NPR and the Trump Administration’s reported interest in a broad-based agreement limiting all types of nuclear weapons, it seems unlikely that the United States and Russia will pursue or conclude an agreement limiting nonstrategic nuclear weapons in the near future. 162 For details on this decision and the negotiation of the INF Treaty see CRS Report R43832, Russian Compliance with the Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty: Background and Issues for Congress, by Amy F. Woolf. Nonstrategic Nuclear Weapons Congressional Research Service RL32572 · VERSION 40 · UPDATED 42 Author Information Amy F. Woolf Specialist in Nuclear Weapons Policy Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 		2020-05-08T16:22:59-0400
F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Updated April 29, 2020 Congressional Research Service https://crsreports.congress.gov RL30563 F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service Summary The largest procurement program in the Department of Defense (DOD), the F-35 Lightning II is a strike fighter aircraft being procured in different versions for the United States Air Force, Marine Corps, and Navy. Current DOD plans call for acquiring a total of 2,456 F-35s. Allies are expected to purchase hundreds of additional F-35s, and eight nations are cost-sharing partners in the program with the United States. The F-35 promises significant advances in military capability. Like many high-technology programs before it, reaching that capability has put the program above its original budget and behind the planned schedule. The Administration’s proposed FY2021 defense budget requested about $11.4 billion in procurement funding for the F-35 program. This would fund the procurement of 48 F-35As for the Air Force, 10 F-35Bs for the Marine Corps, 20 F-35Cs for the Navy and Marines, advance procurement for future aircraft, and continuing modifications. The proposed budget also requested about $1.7 billion for F-35 research and development. FY2020 defense authorization act: The FY2020 defense authorization bill funded F-35 procurement at $10.9 billion for 90 aircraft (60 F-35As, 10 F-35Bs, and 20 F-35Cs, an increase of 11 aircraft and decrease of $0.5 billion from the Administration’s request), including $1.4 billion in advance procurement, the requested level. The joint explanatory statement accompanying the bill included language  authorizing economic order quantity contracting and buy-to-budget acquisition, allowing the purchase of more than the authorized number of F-35s if that procurement would not require additional funds and would mitigate any negative cost and schedule impacts from the actions or decisions of foreign partners or customers (e.g., reduction in purchased quantities);  requiring the Secretary of Defense to seek compensation from the F-35 contractor for costs related to the failure to deliver ready-for-issue spare parts;  restricting the transfer of F-35 aircraft, technology, support equipment, and other assets to Turkey, unless certain conditions are met;  requiring certification that support equipment needed to absorb F-35s formerly intended for Turkey into the U.S. fleet will be procured prior to taking possession of those jets;  requiring a competitive analysis among various methods to improve the F-35’s Autonomic Logistics Information System;  requiring the F-35 Joint Program Office (JPO) to provide sustainment cost data as part of existing quarterly briefings to the congressional defense committees;  reporting on the progress and performance of the F-35 aircraft program (§166);  mandating reports on an integrated master schedule and past performance assessment for each planned phase of F-35 Block 4 and C2D2 upgrades, F-35 reliability and maintainability metrics, Block 4 capability development and fielding activities, and modernization and upgrade plans for the F-35 Autonomic Logistics Information System (ALIS), and the steps being taken to improve accountability of F–35 parts within the supply chain. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service FY2020 defense appropriations bill: The final omnibus budget bill funded F-35 procurement at $11.1 billion for 98 aircraft (62 F-35As, 16 F-35Bs, and 20 F-35Cs, an increase of 20 aircraft and $.3 billion below the Administration’s request), including $1.4 billion in advance procurement, the requested level. The joint explanatory statement accompanying the bill included language  restricting funds to deliver F-35s or related equipment to Turkey, except in accordance with Section 1245 of the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act;  designating savings resulting from F-35 cost reductions to fund alternate sourcing of F-35 parts manufactured in Turkey and to convert F-35As previously designated for Turkey for United States Air Force use;  requiring a certification that the Department of Defense has submitted a formal request for proposal (RFP) for provisioning and cataloguing F-35 cost data; and  allowing modification of up to six F–35s to a test configuration. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service Contents Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 In General .................................................................................................................................. 1 Background ..................................................................................................................................... 1 The F-35 in Brief ....................................................................................................................... 1 In General ........................................................................................................................... 1 Three Service Versions ....................................................................................................... 2 Engine ....................................................................................................................................... 4 Current Program Status ............................................................................................................. 5 Recent Developments ................................................................................................................ 5 Lots 12-14 Agreed To ......................................................................................................... 5 Proposed Multiyear Procurement ....................................................................................... 6 Potential Change in Marine Corps Procurement ................................................................. 6 Changes in International Orders ......................................................................................... 6 Devolution of Joint Program Office .................................................................................... 8 Testing Progress .................................................................................................................. 8 Sustainment Cost Issues ...................................................................................................... 9 Summary of Program History ................................................................................................... 9 F-35 Program Origin and History ........................................................................................... 10 February 2010 Program Restructuring .............................................................................. 12 March, 2010 Nunn-McCurdy Breach ............................................................................... 13 February 2012 Procurement Stretch ................................................................................. 13 Initial Operational Capability ........................................................................................... 13 End of System Development and Demonstration/Entry into IOT&E ............................... 14 Procurement Quantities ........................................................................................................... 15 Planned Total Quantities ................................................................................................... 15 Annual Quantities ............................................................................................................. 15 Low-Rate Initial Production ............................................................................................. 16 F-35 Block Buy ................................................................................................................. 17 Program Management ............................................................................................................. 18 Software Development ............................................................................................................ 19 C2D2 Program .................................................................................................................. 20 Autonomic Logistics Information System ........................................................................ 21 Dual Capability ................................................................................................................. 23 Cost and Funding .................................................................................................................... 24 Total Program Acquisition Cost ........................................................................................ 24 Prior-Year Funding............................................................................................................ 24 Unit Costs ......................................................................................................................... 24 Other Cost Issues..................................................................................................................... 25 Acquisition Cost and Long-Term Affordability ................................................................ 25 Unit Cost Projections ........................................................................................................ 25 Engine Costs ..................................................................................................................... 26 Anticipated Upgrade Costs ............................................................................................... 26 Operating and Support Costs ............................................................................................ 27 Manufacturing Locations ........................................................................................................ 28 Basing ...................................................................................................................................... 28 International Participation ....................................................................................................... 29 In General ......................................................................................................................... 29 F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service International Sales Quantities ........................................................................................... 31 Work Shares and Technology Transfer ............................................................................. 31 Proposed FY2021 Budget.............................................................................................................. 32 Issues for Congress ........................................................................................................................ 33 Overall Need for F-35 ............................................................................................................. 33 Planned Total Procurement Quantities .................................................................................... 33 Block 4/C2D2 as a Separate Program ..................................................................................... 34 Competition ............................................................................................................................. 35 Appropriate Fighter Mix ......................................................................................................... 35 Engine Cost Transparency ....................................................................................................... 36 Affordability ............................................................................................................................ 36 Implications for Industrial Base .............................................................................................. 36 Future Joint Fighter Programs ................................................................................................. 37 Figures Figure 1. F-35 Variants .................................................................................................................... 2 Figure 2. F-35 Program History .................................................................................................... 10 Figure 3. F-35 Procurement Quantities ......................................................................................... 16 Tables Table 1. F-35 Variant Milestones .................................................................................................... 11 Table 2. F-35 LRIPs 5-11 .............................................................................................................. 17 Table 3. F-35 Software Block Schedule ........................................................................................ 20 Table 4. C2D2 budgets, FY2021-FY2025 ..................................................................................... 21 Table 5. F-35 Projected Unit Recurring Flyaway Cost ................................................................. 25 Table 6. FY2021 F-35 Funding Request ....................................................................................... 32 Table 7. FY2021 F-35 Procurement Request ................................................................................ 32 Table A-1. F-35 Key Performance Parameters (KPPs) ................................................................. 38 Appendixes Appendix. F-35 Key Performance Parameters .............................................................................. 38 Contacts Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 38 F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 1 Introduction In General The F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF), also called the Lightning II, is a strike fighter airplane being procured in different versions for the Air Force, Marine Corps, and Navy. The F-35 program is DOD’s largest weapon procurement program in terms of total estimated acquisition cost. Current Department of Defense (DOD) plans call for acquiring a total of 2,456 F-35s1 for the Air Force, Marine Corps, and Navy at an estimated total acquisition cost, as of December, 2018, of about $340.5 billion in constant (i.e., inflation-adjusted) FY2012 dollars.2 U.S. allies are expected to purchase hundreds of additional F-35s, and eight foreign nations are cost-sharing partners in the program. The Administration’s proposed FY2021 defense budget requested about $11.4 billion in procurement funding for the F-35 program. This would fund the procurement of 48 F-35As for the Air Force, 10 F-35Bs for the Marine Corps, 20 F-35Cs for the Navy and Marines, advance procurement for future aircraft, and continuing modifications. The proposed budget also requested about $1.7 billion for F-35 research and development. Background The F-35 in Brief In General The Joint Strike Fighter was conceived as a relatively affordable fifth-generation aircraft3 that could be procured in highly common versions for the Air Force and the Navy. Initially, the Marine Corps was developing its own aircraft to replace the AV-8B Harrier, but in 1994, Congress mandated that the Marine effort be merged with the Air Force/Navy program in order to avoid the higher costs of developing, procuring, operating, and supporting three separate tactical aircraft designs to meet the services’ similar, but not identical, operational needs.4 All three versions of the F-35 will be single-seat aircraft with the ability to go supersonic for short periods and advanced stealth characteristics. The three versions will vary in their combat ranges 1 Thirteen of the aircraft will be acquired for flight testing through research and development funding. 2 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Selected Acquisition Report (SAR): F-35 Joint Strike Fighter Aircraft (F-35), April 17, 2019. 3 “Fifth-generation” aircraft incorporate the most modern technology, and are considered to be generally more capable than earlier-generation aircraft. Fifth-generation fighters combine new developments such as thrust vectoring, composite materials, stealth technology, advanced radar and sensors, and integrated avionics to greatly improve pilot situational awareness. Among fighters currently in service or in regular production, only the Air Force F-22 air superiority fighter and the F-35 are considered fifth-generation aircraft. Russia and China have flown prototype fifth-generation fighters. Strike fighters are dual-role tactical aircraft that are capable of both air-to-ground (strike) and air-to-air (fighter) combat operations. 4 The program’s operational requirements call for 70% to 90% commonality among all three versions. Many of the three versions’ high-cost components—including their engines, avionics, and major airframe structural components—are common. Overall, however, commonality has fallen well short of that goal; see “Devolution of Joint Program Office,” below. More details on the merger of the programs can be found in “F-35 Program Origin and History” below. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 2 and payloads (see the Appendix). All three are to carry their primary weapons internally to maintain a stealthy radar signature. Additional weapons can be carried externally on missions requiring less stealth. Figure 1. F-35 Variants Source: F-35 Joint Program Office briefing. Three Service Versions From a common airframe and powerplant core, the F-35 is being procured in three distinct versions tailored to the varied needs of the military services. Differences among the aircraft include the manner of takeoff and landing, fuel capacity, and carrier suitability, among others. Air Force CTOL Version (F-35A) The Air Force plans to procure 1,763 F-35As, a conventional takeoff and landing (CTOL) version of the aircraft. F-35As are to replace Air Force F-16 fighters and A-10 attack aircraft, and possibly F-15 fighters.5 The F-35A is intended to be a more affordable complement to the Air Force’s F-22 Raptor air superiority fighter.6 The F-35A is not as stealthy7 nor as capable in air-to- 5 Stephen Trimble, “Lockheed says F-35s will replace USAF F-15s,” Flight International, February 4, 2010. 6 For more on the F-22 program, see CRS Report RL31673, Air Force F-22 Fighter Program. 7 A November 13, 2009, press article states that “The F-22 had a -40dBsm all-aspect reduction requirement [i.e., a F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 3 air combat as the F-22, but it is designed to be more capable in air-to-ground combat than the F-22, and stealthier than the F-16. What Is Stealth? “Stealthy” or “low-observable” aircraft are those designed to be difficult for an enemy to detect. This characteristic most often takes the form of reducing an aircraft’s radar signature through careful shaping of the airframe, special coatings, gap sealing, and other measures. Stealth also includes reducing the aircraft’s signature in other ways, as adversaries could try to detect engine heat, electromagnetic emissions from the aircraft’s radars or communications gear, and other signatures. Minimizing these signatures is not without penalty. Shaping an aircraft for stealth leads in a different direction from shaping for speed. Shrouding engines and/or using smaller powerplants reduces performance; reducing electromagnetic signatures may introduce compromises in design and tactics. Stealthy coatings, access port designs, and seals may require higher maintenance time and cost than more conventional aircraft. If the F-15/F-16 combination represented the Air Force’s earlier-generation “high-low” mix of air superiority fighters and more-affordable dual-role aircraft, the F-22/F-35A combination might be viewed as the Air Force’s intended future high-low mix.8 The Air Force states that “The F-22A and F-35 each possess unique, complementary, and essential capabilities that together provide the synergistic effects required to maintain that margin of superiority across the spectrum of conflict…. Legacy 4th generation aircraft simply cannot survive to operate and achieve the effects necessary to win in an integrated, anti-access environment.”9 Marine Corps STOVL Version (F-35B) The Marine Corps plans to procure 353 F-35Bs, a short takeoff and vertical landing (STOVL) version of the aircraft.10 F-35Bs are to replace Marine Corps AV-8B Harrier vertical/short takeoff and landing attack aircraft and Marine Corps F/A-18A/B/C/D strike fighters, which are CTOL aircraft. The Marine Corps decided to not procure the newer F/A-18E/F strike fighter11 and instead wait for the F-35B in part because the F/A-18E/F is a CTOL aircraft, and the Marine Corps prefers aircraft capable of vertical operations. The Department of the Navy states that “The Marine Corps intends to leverage the F-35B’s sophisticated sensor suite and very low observable, fifth generation strike fighter capabilities, particularly in the area of data collection, to support the requirement to reduce the radar reflectivity of the F-22 when viewed from all angles by 40 decibels per square meter], while the F-35 came in at -30dBsm with some gaps in coverage.” (David A. Fulghum and Bradley Perrett, “Experts Doubt Chinese Stealth Fighter Timeline,” Aerospace Daily & Defense Report, November 13, 2009, pp. 1-2.) 8 The term high-low mix refers to a force consisting of a combination of high-cost, high-capability aircraft and lower-cost, more-affordable aircraft. Procuring a high-low mix is a strategy for attempting to balance the goal for having a minimum number of very high capability tactical aircraft to take on the most challenging projected missions and the goal of being able to procure tactical aircraft sufficient in total numbers within available resources to perform all projected missions. 9 Department of the Air Force Presentation to the House Armed Services Committee Subcommittee on Air and Land Forces, United States House of Representatives, Subject: Air Force Programs, Combined Statement of: Lieutenant General Daniel J. Darnell, Air Force Deputy Chief Of Staff For Air, Space and Information Operations, Plans And Requirements (AF/A3/5) [and] Lieutenant General Mark D. Shackelford, Military Deputy, Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Acquisition (SAF/AQ) Lieutenant General Raymond E. Johns, Jr., Air Force Deputy Chief of Staff for Strategic Plans And Programs (AF/A8) May 20, 2009, pp. 7-8, 10. 10 To permit STOVL operations, the F-35B has an engine exhaust nozzle at the rear than can swivel downward, and a mid-fuselage lift fan connected to the engine that blows air downward to help lift the forward part of the plane. 11 For more on the F/A-18E/F program, see CRS Report RL30624, Navy F/A-18E/F and EA-18G Aircraft Program. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 4 Marine Air Ground Task Force well beyond the abilities of today’s strike and EW [electronic warfare] assets.”12 Navy Carrier-Suitable Version (F-35C) The Navy plans to procure 273 F-35Cs, a carrier-suitable CTOL version of the aircraft, and the Marines will also procure 67 F-35Cs.13 The F-35C is also known as the “CV” version of the F-35; CV is the naval designation for aircraft carrier. The Navy plans in the future to operate carrier air wings featuring a combination of F/A-18E/Fs (which the Navy has been procuring since FY1997) and F-35Cs. The F/A-18E/F is generally considered a fourth-generation strike fighter.14 The F-35C is to be the Navy’s first aircraft designed for stealth, a contrast with the Air Force, which has operated stealthy bombers and fighters for decades. The F/A-18E/F, which is less expensive to procure than the F-35C, incorporates a few stealth features, but the F-35C is stealthier. The Department of the Navy states that “the commonality designed into the joint F-35 program will minimize acquisition and operating costs of Navy and Marine Corps tactical aircraft, and allow enhanced interoperability with our sister Service, the United States Air Force, and the eight partner nations participating in the development of this aircraft.”15 Engine The F-35 is powered by the Pratt & Whitney F135 engine, which was derived from the F-22’s F119 engine. The F135 is produced in Pratt & Whitney’s facilities in East Hartford and Middletown, CT.16 Rolls-Royce builds the vertical lift system for the F-35B as a subcontractor to Pratt & Whitney. Consistent with congressional direction for the FY1996 defense budget, DOD established a program to develop an alternate engine for the F-35. The alternate engine, the F136, was developed by a team consisting of GE Transportation—Aircraft Engines of Cincinnati, OH, and Rolls-Royce PLC of Bristol, England, and Indianapolis, IN. The F136 was a derivative of the F120 engine originally developed to compete with the F119 engine for the F-22 program. DOD included the F-35 alternate engine program in its proposed budgets through FY2006, although Congress in certain years increased funding for the program above the requested amount and/or included bill and report language supporting the program. 12 Statement of Vice Admiral David Architzel, USN, Principal Military Deputy, Research, Development and Acquisition, LTGEN George J. Trautman III, USMC, Deputy Commandant for Aviation, [and] RADM Allen G. Myers, USN, Director of Warfare Integration, Before the Seapower and Expeditionary Warfare [sic: Forces] Subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee [hearing] on [the] Department of the Navy’s Aviation Procurement Program, May 19, 2009, pp. 1-2. 13 Features for carrier suitability include, among other things, strengthened landing gear, a strengthened airframe, and an arresting hook so as to permit catapult launches and arrested landings, as well as folding wing tips for more compact storage aboard ship. 14 Some F/A-18E/F supporters argue that it is a “fourth-plus” or “4.5”generation strike fighter because it incorporates some fifth-generation technology, particularly in its sensors. 15 Statement of Vice Admiral David Architzel, USN, Principal Military Deputy, Research, Development and Acquisition, LTGEN George J. Trautman III, USMC, Deputy Commandant for Aviation, [and] RADM Allen G. Myers, USN, Director of Warfare Integration, before the Seapower and Expeditionary Warfare [sic: Forces] Subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee [hearing] on [the] Department of the Navy’s Aviation Procurement Program, May 19, 2009, p. 1. 16 Pratt and Whitney’s parent firm is United Technologies. It is expected to be transferred to Raytheon Technologies early in 2021. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 5 The George W. Bush Administration proposed terminating the alternate engine program in FY2007, FY2008, and FY2009. The Obama Administration did likewise in FY2010. Congress rejected these proposals and provided funding, bill language, and report language to continue the program. The General Electric/Rolls Royce Fighter Engine Team ended its effort to provide an alternate engine on December 2, 2011. Fuller details of the alternate engine program and issues for Congress arising from it are detailed in CRS Report R41131, F-35 Alternate Engine Program: Background and Issues for Congress. Current Program Status The F-35 is currently in low-rate initial production, with 500 aircraft delivered as of February 2020. At least 353 of those were in U.S. service.17 Four to five aircraft are currently delivered each month. The production rate had been scheduled to increase to 120 per year by 2019.18 In keeping with the acquisition plan that overlapped development and production (known as “concurrency”), the F-35 was also in system development and demonstration (SDD), with testing and software development ongoing, from October 2001 until April 11, 2018. The SDD phase will formally continue until the end of Initial Operational Test and Evaluation, when a “Milestone C” full-rate production decision will be made.19 DOT&E approved entering formal IOT&E on December 3, 2018.20 The full-rate production decision is expected in FY2021.21 Recent Developments Significant developments since the previous major edition of this report (April 23, 2018) include the following, many of which are discussed in greater detail later in the report: Lots 12-14 Agreed To On June 10, 2019, DOD and Lockheed Martin reached initial agreement on F-35 production lot 12, with options for lots 13 and 14. The deal would encompass 478 aircraft for $34 billion, including sales to international partners. 22 On October 29, 2019, negotiations were concluded with 149, 160, and 169 aircraft in the respective lots.23 17 Lockheed Martin, “Program Summary as of March 2020,” press release, March 2020, https://a855196877272cb14560-2a4fa819a63ddcc0c289f9457bc3ebab.ssl.cf2.rackcdn.com/18179/program_summary_3.3..png. 18 Pat Host, “F-35 Program Tripling Production, Fielding Rate By 2019,” Defense Daily, September 10, 2015. 19 Under the revised schedule following the 2011 program restructure, Milestone C was anticipated in November 2015. 20 Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, FY2019 Annual Report, December 20, 2019, p. 19. 21 Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, FY2019 Annual Report, December 20, 2019, p. 32. 22 Lockheed Martin, “Pentagon and Lockheed Martin Reach Handshake Agreement on F-35 Production Contract,” press release, June 10, 2019, https://www.f35.com/news/detail/pentagon-and-lockheed-martin-reach-handshake-agreement-on-f-35-product1. 23 C. Todd Lopez, DOD Finalizes Purchase Plan for F-35 Aircraft, Department of Defense, Washington, DC, October 29, 2019, https://www.defense.gov/Explore/News/Article/Article/2002585/dod-finalizes-purchase-plan-for-f-35-aircraft/. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 6 Proposed Multiyear Procurement In the December 2017 Selected Acquisition Report, DOD disclosed an intention to acquire F-35s through multiyear contracting. From FY 2021 to the end of the program, the USAF production profile assumes one 3-year multi-year procurement (FY 2021-FY 2023) followed by successive 5-year multi-year procurements beginning in FY2024, with the required EOQ investments and associated savings. The Department of Navy (DoN) did not include EOQ funding in the PB 2019 submission for a multiyear in FY 2021-2023 for either the F-35B or F-35C. The DoN plans to reassess that decision in the coming FY 2020 budget cycle. Therefore, the DoN PB 2019 production profile assumes annual procurements from FY 2021-2023, followed by successive 5-year multi-year procurements from FY 2024 to the end of the program with necessary EOQ investments and associated savings.24 Subsequent hearings considered the merits of multiyear contracting, but Congress has yet to grant that authority. The FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 116-92) authorized economic order quantity contracting and buy-to-budget acquisition, a variation on multiyear contracting. 25 For a discussion of the differences, see “F-35 Block Buy,” below. Potential Change in Marine Corps Procurement On March 23, 2020, the Marine Corps released a “New Force Design Initiative” outlining proposed changes to its force structure. The proposal included reducing the primary aircraft authorization (PAA) of Marine F-35 squadrons from 16 to 10 each. This would affect nine F-35B squadrons (five other active and two reserve F-35B squadrons were already planned to be at 10 PAA).26 The Corps also has four F-35C squadrons, but those had also previously been planned for 10 PAA.27 The Marine proposal would appear to require 54 fewer F-35Bs than in the existing program of record, currently 353 F-35Bs and 67 F-35Cs.28 The Air Force has also been considering force mix changes that could affect the number of F-35s acquired (see “Issues for Congress,” below). Changes in International Orders As noted, the F-35 is an international program, with commitments from program partners and other countries to share in the development costs and acquire aircraft. The other nations’ plans have varied over time. The December 2019 Selected Acquisition Report projects 764 international sales—632 to partners in the program and 132 through foreign military sales.29 Most recently: 24 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Selected Acquisition Report (SAR): F-35 Joint Strike Fighter Aircraft (F-35), March 19, 2018, p. 11. 25 See, inter alia, Christen McCurdy, “Congress, Pentagon to hold off on multiyear F-35 contract,” UPI, November 14, 2019, https://www.upi.com/Defense-News/2019/11/14/Congress-Pentagon-to-hold-off-on-multiyear-F-35-contract/2731573693286/. 26 U.S. Marine Corps, 2019 Marine Corps Aviation Plan, Washington, DC, 2019, p. 36, https://www.aviation.marines.mil/portals/11/2019%20avplan.pdf. 27 U.S. Marine Corps, 2019 Marine Corps Aviation Plan, Washington, DC, 2019, p. 36, https://www.aviation.marines.mil/portals/11/2019%20avplan.pdf. 28 U.S. Marine Corps, Force Design 2030, March 2020, p. 7, https://go.usa.gov/xvqF9. 29 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Selected Acquisition Report (SAR): F-35 Joint Strike Fighter Aircraft (F-35), April 17, 2019, p. 74. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 7  Turkey, which had intended to acquire 100 F-35s, was expelled from the F-35 program after a disagreement with the U.S. over its acquisition and intended fielding of a Russian air defense system.30  Australia took delivery of its 15th F-35A in April 2019, toward their order for 60 aircraft.31  Belgium chose the F-35 as its new fighter, with an initial order of 34.32  Following the election of a new government, Canada canceled its decision to acquire 65 F-35s. Canada has remained a formal partner in the program,33 and the Trudeau government has included the F-35 as a candidate for its follow-on fighter requirement, even modifying its procurement rules to keep the F-35 a viable contender.34  Poland has confirmed an order for 32 F-35As, the 10th NATO nation to buy the jet.35  Japan has increased its order by 105 aircraft. According to President Trump, “This purchase would give Japan the largest F-35 fleet of any U.S. ally.”36  Norway declared initial operational capability of its first 15 of the 52 jets it plans to buy.37  The Netherlands increased its planned buy from 37 to 46 aircraft.38  The State Department approved the sale of 12 F-35s to Singapore, which planned to buy four with an option for eight more.39 30 For more discussion, see CRS Report R41761, Turkey-U.S. Defense Cooperation: Prospects and Challenges, by Jim Zanotti, and CRS Report R41368, Turkey: Background and U.S. Relations, by Jim Zanotti and Clayton Thomas. 31 “Two more Australian F-35s arrive at Luke AFB,” Australian Defence Magazine, May 31, 2019, https://www.australiandefence.com.au/defence/air/two-more-australian-f-35s-arrive-at-luke-afb. 32 John A. Tirpak, “New F-35 Block Buy is Close, Lockheed Says,” Air Force, October 23, 2019, https://www.airforcemag.com/new-f-35-block-buy-is-close-lockheed-says/. 33 Lee Berthiaume, “Liberals fork over another $30 million to keep Canada at F-35 table,” Canadian Press, May 25, 2017, http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/f-35-fighter-jet-joint-strike-canada-fee-1.4131285. 34 David Donald, “F-35 and Super Hornet Back on the Table for Canada,” AINOnline, February 26, 2018, https://www.ainonline.com/aviation-news/defense/2018-02-26/f-35-and-super-hornet-back-table-canada, and David Pugliese, “Canada changes fighter jet rules to allow F-35 bid,” Ottawa Citizen, May 9, 2019, https://ottawacitizen.com/news/national/defence-watch/canada-changes-fighter-jet-rules-to-allow-f-35-bid/. 35 Bartosz Glowacki, “Poland signs F-35 contract worth $4.6bn,” FlightGlobal, January 31, 2020, https://www.flightglobal.com/defence/poland-signs-f-35-contract-worth-46bn/136476.article, and U.S. Mission Poland, Poland’s Purchase of F-35 Fighters, Warsaw, January 31, 2020, https://pl.usembassy.gov/purchase_f35/. Defense Security Cooperation Agency, Poland – F-35 Joint Strike Fighter Aircraft, Washington, DC, September 11, 2019, https://www.instapaper.com/read/1285363759. 36 White House Press Office, Remarks by President Trump and Prime Minister Abe of Japan in Joint Press Conference, Tokyo, May 27, 2019, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/remarks-president-trump-prime-minister-abe-japan-joint-press-conference-3/. 37 Government of Norway, Major Milestone: Norway declares IOC for F-35A, November 6, 2019, https://www.regjeringen.no/en/aktuelt/major-milestone-norway-declares-ioc-for-f-35a/id2676740/, and Christopher Dennis, “US officials welcome Norway’s new F-35 capabilities in an increasingly competitive Northern Europe,” Stars and Stripes, November 27, 2019, https://www.stripes.com/news/europe/us-officials-welcome-norway-s-new-f-35-capabilities-in-an-increasingly-competitive-northern-europe-1.608872. 38 Sebastian Sprenger, “The Netherlands to buy nine more F-35s for $1.1 billion,” Defense News, October 8, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/global/europe/2019/10/08/the-netherlands-to-buy-nine-more-f-35s-for-11-billion/. 39 John Geddie and Aradhana Aravindan, “U.S. State Dept. approves sale of 12 F-35 jets to Singapore,” Reuters, F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 8  South Korea will order 20 F-35s in addition to the 40 already on order.40  The F-35 continues to be evaluated in competitions in Finland and Switzerland.41 Devolution of Joint Program Office On January 14, 2020, the House Armed Services Committee received a briefing on efforts to reform or eliminate the F-35 Joint Program Office.42 Section 146 of the FY2017 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 114-328) required DOD to examine alternative management structures for the F-35 program. Proponents argued that the overhead structure of a joint office, even if needed for development of a joint aircraft, is not needed once production has been established, and further that the F-35 is functionally three separate aircraft, with much less commonality than earlier envisioned. “[E]ven the [then] Program Executive Officer of the F-35 Joint Program Office, General Christopher Bogdan, recently admitted the variants are only 20–25 percent common.”43 Supporters cited the requirement by the United States to support international customers and to oversee further software and other upgrades as reasons to keep the office in place. The Joint Program Office employs 2,590 people, and the annual cost to operate it is on the order of about $70 million a year.44 In a letter to Congress accompanying that report, Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment Ellen Lord declared an intention to begin a deliberate, conditions-based, and risk-informed transition ... from the existing F-35 management structure to an eventual management structure with separate Service-run F-35A and F-35B/C program offices that are integrated with and report through the individual Military Departments.45 Specific timing of the transition, and the responsibilities to be transferred to the services, have not been announced.46 Testing Progress DOD’s annual testing report stated, “The program continued to evaluate and document air system performance against joint contract specification (JCS) requirements in order to close out the SDD January 10, 2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-singapore-defence-lockheed/u-s-state-dept-approves-sale-of-12-f-35-jets-to-singapore-idUSKBN1Z90G9. 40 Jeff Jeong, “South Korea to buy 20 more F-35 jets,” Defense News, October 10, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/global/asia-pacific/2019/10/10/south-korea-to-buy-20-more-f-35-jets/. 41 John A. Tirpak, “New F-35 Block Buy is Close, Lockheed Says,” Air Force, October 23, 2019, https://www.airforcemag.com/new-f-35-block-buy-is-close-lockheed-says/. 42 Anthony Capaccio, “Scrapping Pentagon F-35 Office an Option to Cut Upkeep Costs,” Bloomberg News, January 14, 2020, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-01-14/scrapping-pentagon-s-f-35-office-an-option-to-cut-upkeep-costs. 43 S.Rept. 114-255, p. 280. 44 Testimony of Lt. Gen. Christopher Bogdan, U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Armed Services, F-35 Joint Strike Fighter Program, 114th Cong., 2nd sess., April 26, 2016. 45 Letter from Ellen M. Lord, Under Secretary (Acquisition and Sustainment), to Rep. Mac Thornberry, Chairman, House Committee on Armed Services, March 27, 2018. 46 See, inter alia, Oriana Pawlyk, “As Services Take Greater Role on F-35, Joint Program Office to Remain,” Military.com, April 11, 2018, https://www.military.com/dodbuzz/2018/04/11/services-take-greater-role-f-35-joint-program-office-remain.html, and Valerie Insinna, “F-35 program head supportive of future transition to service-led offices,” Defense News, April 12, 2018, https://www.defensenews.com/digital-show-dailies/navy-league/2018/04/11/f-35-program-head-supportive-of-future-transition-to-service-led-offices/. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 9 contract. As of September 17, 2019, the program had closed out 493 of the 536 capability requirements…. Full closure of the SDD contract may take years to complete.” However, “In FY19, DOT&E approved elimination of 29 F-35 test missions (more than 200 sorties) because enough data had already been collected or the test outcome was obvious.”47 Overall, Although the fleet-wide trend in aircraft availability showed modest improvement in 2019, it remains below the target value of 65 percent. No significant portion of the fleet, including the combat-coded fleet, was able to achieve and sustain the DOD mission capable (MC) rate goal of 80 percent. However, individual units have been able to achieve the 80 percent target for short periods during deployed operations.48 Sustainment Cost Issues Since 2015, operations and sustainment costs for the F-35 fleet’s lifecycle have been estimated at more than $1 trillion. The latest F-35 Selected Acquisition Report speaks (in language unusual for that document) to the need to reduce those costs: At current estimates, the projected F-35 sustainment outlays based upon given planned fleet growth will strain future service O&S budgets. (NB: The previous version had used the words “are too costly.”) The prime contractor must embrace much-needed supply chain management affordability initiatives, optimize priorities across the supply chain for spare and new production parts, and enable the exchange of necessary data rights to implement the required stand-up of planned government organic software capabilities.49 A media report indicated that the Air Force was considering reducing its buy of F-35As due to its support costs. “The shortfall would force the service to subtract 590 of the fighter jets from the 1,763 it plans to order ... the Air Force faces an annual bill of about $3.8 billion a year that must be cut back over the coming decade.”50 “‘If you can afford to buy something but you have to keep it in the parking lot because you can’t afford to own and operate it, then it doesn’t do you much good,’ says F-35 JPO Program Executive Officer Vice Adm. Mat Winter.”51 The Air Force has subsequently begun acquiring the F-15EX fighter, in part arguing that its operating costs are significantly lower than the F-35’s.52 Summary of Program History On December 21, 2016, then-President-Elect Donald J. Trump received a background briefing on the F-35 program, designed to summarize the program’s status and challenges. Although the program has progressed since then, it may be interesting to see how DOD characterizes the 47 Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, FY2019 Annual Report, December 20, 2019. 48 Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, FY2019 Annual Report, December 20, 2019, p. 20. 49 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Selected Acquisition Report (SAR): F-35 Joint Strike Fighter Aircraft (F-35), April 17, 2019, p. 10. See also Anthony Capaccio, “Lockheed Gets Edict to Cut F-35’s $1.1 Trillion Support Bill,” Bloomberg News, April 5, 2018, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-04-05/pentagon-says-lockheed-must-keep-1-1-trillion-f-35-costs-down. 50 Anthony Capaccio, “Air Force Risks Losing Third of F-35s on Upkeep Costs,” Bloomberg News, March 28, 2018, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-03-28/air-force-risks-losing-third-of-f-35s-if-upkeep-costs-aren-t-cut. 51 Lara Seligman, “F-35 Sustainment Challenges Mount As Global Fleet Grows,” Aviation Week and Space Technology, April 5, 2018, http://aviationweek.com/defense/f-35-sustainment-challenges-mount-global-fleet-grows. 52 See also CRS In Focus IF11521, Air Force F-15EX Fighter Program. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 10 history of the program when it is not for a public audience. The pertinent chart presented to President Trump is shown in Figure 2. Details of the program history follow. Figure 2. F-35 Program History As briefed to President-Elect Trump, 2016 Source: Joseph Trevithick, \"These Are The Briefings President-Elect Trump Got On The F-35, Air Force One, and Nukes,\" The War Zone, April 19, 2019, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/27541/these-are-the-briefings-president-elect-trump-got-on-the-f-35-air-force-one-and-nukes. F-35 Program Origin and History The Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) program that became the F-35 began in the early 1990s.53 Three different airframe designs were proposed by Boeing, Lockheed, and McDonnell Douglas (teamed 53 The JSF program emerged in late 1995 from the Joint Advanced Strike Technology (JAST) program, which began in late 1993 as a result of the Clinton Administration’s Bottom-Up Review (BUR) of U.S. defense policy and programs. The BUR envisaged the JAST program as a replacement for two other tactical aircraft programs that were being terminated (the A-12 program, which was intended to provide a stealthy new carrier-based attack plane to replace the Navy’s aging A-6 carrier-based attack planes, and the Multi-Role Fighter, which the Air Force had considered as a replacement for its F-16 fighters). In 1995, in response to congressional direction, a program led by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) to develop an advanced short takeoff and vertical landing (ASTOVL) aircraft was incorporated into the JAST program. This opened the way for Marine Corps and UK participation in the JAST program, since the Marine Corps and the UK were interested procuring a new STOVL aircraft to replace their aging Harrier STOVL attack F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 11 with Northrop Grumman and British Aerospace). On November 16, 1996, the Defense Department announced that Boeing and Lockheed Martin had been chosen to compete in the concept demonstration phase of the program, with Pratt and Whitney providing propulsion hardware and engineering support. Boeing and Lockheed were each awarded contracts to build and test-fly two aircraft to demonstrate their competing concepts for all three planned JSF variants.54 The competition between Boeing and Lockheed Martin was closely watched. Given the size of the JSF program and the expectation that the JSF might be the last fighter aircraft program that DOD would initiate for many years, DOD’s decision on the JSF program was expected to shape the future of both U.S. tactical aviation and the U.S. tactical aircraft industrial base. In October 2001, DOD selected the Lockheed design as the winner of the competition, and the JSF program entered the system development and demonstration (SDD) phase, with SDD contracts awarded to Lockheed Martin for the aircraft and Pratt and Whitney for the aircraft’s engine. General Electric continued technical efforts related to the development of an alternate engine for competition in the program’s production phase. Table 1. F-35 Variant Milestones First flown Original IOC goal IOC F-35A December 15, 2006 March 2013 August 2, 2016 F-35B June 11, 2008 First hover: March 17, 2010 March 2012 July 31, 2015 F-35C June 6, 2010 March 2015 February 28, 2019 Source: Prepared by CRS based on press reports and DOD testimony. Note: IOC is Initial Operational Capability (discussed below). As shown in Table 1, the first flights of an initial version of the F-35A and the F-35B occurred in the first quarter of FY2007 and the third quarter of FY2008, respectively. The first flight of a slightly improved version of the F-35A occurred on November 14, 2009.55 The F-35C first flew on June 6, 2010.56 aircraft. The name of the program was then changed to Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) to focus on joint development and production of a next-generation fighter/attack plane. A Joint Operational Requirements Document for the F-35 was issued in March 2000 and revalidated by DOD’s Joint Requirements Oversight Council in October 2001. On October 24, 2001, the Defense Acquisition Board held a Milestone B review for the program. (Milestone B approval would permit the program to enter the SDD phase.) On October 25, 2001, the Secretary of Defense certified to Congress (in accordance with Section 212 of the FY2001 defense authorization act [H.R. 4205/P.L. 106-398 of October 30, 2000]) that the program had successfully completed the CDP exit criteria and demonstrated sufficient technical maturity to enter SDD. On October 26, 2001, the SDD contracts were awarded to Lockheed and Pratt and Whitney. A Preliminary Design Review for the F-35 program was conducted in April 2003, and Critical Design Reviews were held in February 2006 (F-35A and F-35B) and June 2007 (F-35C). 54 Subsequent to the selection of the Boeing and Lockheed Martin designs, Boeing acquired McDonnell Douglas and merged the two firms’ JSF teams. 55 “First Flight,” Defense Daily, November 23, 2009, p. 3. 56 Graham Warwick, “JSF Carrier Variant Meets Handling Goals On First Flight,” Aerospace Daily, June 7, 2010. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 12 The F-35B’s ability to hover, scheduled for demonstration in November 2009, was shown for the first time on March 17, 2010.57 The first vertical landing took place the next day.58 February 2010 Program Restructuring In November 2009, DOD’s Joint Estimating Team issued a report (called JET II) stating that the F-35 program would need an extra 30 months to complete the SDD phase. In response to JET II, the then-impending Nunn-McCurdy breach, and other developments, on February 24, 2010, Pentagon acquisition chief Ashton Carter issued an Acquisition Decision Memorandum (ADM) restructuring the F-35 program. Key elements of the restructuring included the following:  Extending the SDD phase by 13 months, thus delaying Milestone C (full-rate production) to November 2015 and adding an extra low-rate initial production (LRIP) lot of aircraft to be purchased during the delay. Carter proposed to make up the difference between JET II’s projected 30-month delay and his 13-month schedule by adding three extra early-production aircraft to the test program. It is not clear how extra aircraft could be added promptly if production was already behind schedule.  Funding the program to the “Revised JET II” (13-month delay) level, implicitly accepting the JET II findings as valid.  Withholding $614 million in award fees from the contractor for poor performance, while adding incentives to produce more aircraft than planned within the new budget.  Moving procurement funds to R&D. “More than $2.8 billion that was budgeted earlier to buy the military’s next-generation fighter would instead be used to continue its development.”59 “Taken together, these forecasts result in the delivery of 122 fewer aircraft over the Future Years Defense Program (FYDP), relative to the President’s FY 2010 budget baseline,” Carter said.60 This reduction led the Navy and Air Force to revise their dates for IOC as noted above. “F-35B 3,000 lbs overweight; added 3 years / $6.5B” A significant issue in early development, noted in Figure 2, was the weight of the F-35B variant. Because the F-35B takes off and lands near-vertically, weight is a particularly critical factor, as aircraft performance with low- to no-airspeed depends directly on the ratio of engine thrust to aircraft weight. The delay was exacerbated by the consolidation of the former JAST and ASTOVL programs, discussed in footnote 53. Normally, in a development program, the most technically simple variant is developed first, and lessons applied while working up to more complicated variants. Because the Marine Corps’ Harrier fleet was reaching the end of life before the Air Force and Navy fleets the F-35 was designed to replace, in this case, the most complicated variant—the F-35B—had to be developed first. That meant the technical challenges unique to STOVL aircraft delayed all of the variants. 57 Graham Warwick, “F-35B Hovers for First Time,” Aviation Week/Ares blog, March 17, 2010. 58 Graham Warwick, “STOVL F-35B Makes First Vertical Landing,” Aviation Week/Ares blog, March 18, 2010. 59 Tony Capaccio, “Lockheed F-35 Purchases Delayed in Pentagon’s Fiscal 2011 Plan,” Bloomberg News, January 6, 2010. 60 F-35 Lightning II Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Restructure Acquisition Decision Memorandum (ADM), Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition, Technology & Logistics), February 24, 2010. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 13 March, 2010 Nunn-McCurdy Breach On March 20, 2010, DOD formally announced that the JSF program had exceeded the cost increase limits specified in the Nunn-McCurdy cost containment law, as average procurement unit cost, in FY2002 dollars, had grown 57% to 89% over the original program baseline. Simply put, this requires the Secretary of Defense to notify Congress of the breach, present a plan to correct the program, and to certify that the program is essential to national security before it can continue.61 On June 2, 2010, the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics issued an Acquisition Decision Memorandum (ADM) certifying the F-35 Program in accordance with section 2433a of title 10, United States Code. As required by section 2433a, of title 10, Milestone B was rescinded. A Defense Acquisition Board (DAB) was held in November 2010.... No decision was rendered at the November 2010 DAB.... Currently, cumulative cost and schedule pressures result in a critical Nunn-McCurdy breach to both the original (2001) and current (2007) baseline for both the Program Acquisition Unit Cost (PAUC) and Average Procurement Unit Cost (APUC). The breach is currently reported at 78.23% for the PAUC and 80.66% for the APUC against the original baseline and 27.34% for the PAUC and 31.23% for the APUC against the current baseline.62 February 2012 Procurement Stretch With the FY2013 budget, F-35 acquisition was slowed, with the acquisition of 179 previously planned aircraft being moved to years beyond the FY2013-2017 FYDP “for a total of $15.1 billion in savings.”63 Note that this stretch, along with the SDD extension already mentioned, contributed to the “6.5 years late” referenced in Figure 2. Initial Operational Capability Congress required a formal declaration of IOCs in Section 155 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2013 (P.L. 112-239). The current dates (by fiscal year) are shown in Table 1. The F-35A, F-35B, and F-35C were originally scheduled to achieve IOC in March 2013, March 2012, and March 2015, respectively.64 The Marine Corps declared F-35B Initial Operational Capability (IOC) on July 31, 2015. The Air Force declared F-35A IOC on August 2, 2016.65 The Navy declared IOC on February 28, 2019.66 61 For a history of the Nunn-McCurdy law and options for its future, see CRS Report R41293, The Nunn-McCurdy Act: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress, by Heidi M. Peters and Charles V. O'Connor. 62 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Selected Acquisition Report (SAR): F-35, December 31, 2010, p. 4. 63 Tony Capaccio, “Pentagon Takes $1.6 Billion From Lockheed F-35 in Biggest Cut,” Bloomberg News, February 13, 2012. 64 The Navy had initially accelerated its estimated IOC for the F-35C to September 2014. Andrew Tilghman, “Joint Strike Fighter Timeline Moved Up,” NavyTimes.com, September 18, 2009. In November 2009, Lockheed announced that the first flight of an F-35C test aircraft would be delayed from the final quarter of 2009 to the first quarter of 2010. (Dan Taylor, “Navy Joint Strike Fighter Carrier Variant Test Aircraft Will Not Fly Until 2010,” Inside the Navy, November 9, 2009.) 65 “Air Force Declares F-35A Lightning II ‘Combat Ready,’” Air Force News Service, August 3, 2016, https://go.usa.gov/xQbTg. 66 Commander Naval Air Forces Public Affairs, F-35C Achieves Initial Operational Capability, Story Number: NNS190228-18, San Diego, CA, February 28, 2019, https://www.navy.mil/submit/display.asp?story_id=108746. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 14 It should be noted that IOC means different things to different services: F-35A initial operational capability (IOC) shall be declared when the first operational squadron is equipped with 12-24 aircraft, and Airmen are trained, manned, and equipped to conduct basic Close Air Support (CAS), Interdiction, and limited Suppression and Destruction of Enemy Air Defense (SEAD/DEAD) operations in a contested environment. Based on the current F-35 Joint Program Office (JPO) schedule, the F-35A will reach the IOC milestone between August 2016 (Objective) and December 2016 (Threshold).... F-35B IOC shall be declared when the first operational squadron is equipped with 10-16 aircraft, and US Marines are trained, manned, and equipped to conduct CAS, Offensive and Defensive Counter Air, Air Interdiction, Assault Support Escort, and Armed Reconnaissance in concert with Marine Air Ground Task Force resources and capabilities. Based on the current F-35 JPO schedule, the F-35B will reach the IOC milestone between July 2015 (Objective) and December 2015 (Threshold).... Navy F-35C IOC shall be declared when the first operational squadron is equipped with 10 aircraft, and Navy personnel are trained, manned and equipped to conduct assigned missions. Based on the current F-35 JPO schedule, the F-35C will reach the IOC milestone between August 2018 (Objective) and February 2019 (Threshold).67 Additionally, Each of the three US services will reach initial operating capability (IOC) with different software packages. The F-35B will go operational for the US Marines in December 2015 with the Block 2B software, while the Air Force plans on achieving IOC on the F-35A in December 2016 with Block 3I, which is essentially the same software on more powerful hardware. The Navy intends to go operational with the F-35C in February 2019, on the Block 3F software.68 One complication regarding the Navy’s operational capability is that the Navy reportedly will not be able to airlift F-35 engines to carriers at sea until the introduction of the CMV-22 carrier onboard delivery aircraft in 2021.69 End of System Development and Demonstration/Entry into IOT&E The F-35 Joint Program Office declared the 17-year System Development and Demonstration (SDD) effort complete on April 11, 2018. “(T)he developmental flight team has conducted more than 9,200 sorties, accumulated 17,000 flight hours and executed more than 65,000 test points.”70 The end of the flight test effort does not mark the actual end of SDD, though; that will occur at Milestone C, following the completion of initial operational test and evaluation (IOT&E). The Director of Operational Test and Evaluation (DOT&E) approved entering formal IOT&E on December 3, 2018. DOT&E notes that the F-35 enters IOT&E with 873 unresolved deficiencies, 13 of which are classified as “Category 1 ‘must-fix’ items that affect safety or combat 67 United States Navy, United States Marine Corps, United States Air Force, F-35 Initial Operational Capability, June 2013. 68 Aaron Mehta, “After ‘Transformative’ Year, F-35 Program Focuses on Software, Quantity,” Defense News, January 14, 2014. 69 Mark D. Faram, “CMV-22 Osprey will deploy on Vinson with F-35C in 2021,” Navy Times, April 10, 2018, https://www.navytimes.com/news/your-navy/2018/04/09/cmv-22-osprey-will-deploy-on-vinson-with-f-35c-in-2021/. 70 Lara Seligman, “F-35 Completes Flight Trials, Now On To Final Test,” Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, April 12, 2018, http://aviationweek.com/defense/f-35-completes-flight-trials-now-final-test. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 15 capability.”71 The program’s high concurrency means there may be substantial costs to incorporate the lessons of testing: “IOT&E, which provides the most credible means to predict combat performance, likely will not be completed until … over 600 aircraft will already have been built.”72 Procurement Quantities Planned Total Quantities The F-35 program includes a planned total of 2,456 aircraft for the Air Force, Marine Corps, and Navy. This comprises 13 research and development aircraft and 2,443 production aircraft: 1,763 F-35As for the Air Force, 273 F-35Cs for the Navy, and 67 F-35Cs and 353 F-35Bs for the Marine Corps.73 As noted in “Potential Change in Marine Corps Procurement” above, the Marine Corps recently mooted a change in squadron size that would imply a 54-jet reduction in its planned F-35 fleet, but that has not yet become a validated goal. Annual Quantities DOD began procuring F-35s in FY2007. Figure 3 shows F-35 procurement quantities authorized through FY2020, requested procurement quantities for FY2021, and projected requests through the FYDP. The figures in the table do not include 13 research and development aircraft procured with research and development funding. (Quantities for foreign buyers are discussed in the next section.) 71 Anthony Capaccio, “F-35’s Gun That Can’t Shoot Straight Adds to Its Roster of Flaws,” Bloomberg News, January 30, 2020, https://www.instapaper.com/read/1273117282. 72 Director, Operational Test & Evaluation, FY 2017 Annual Report, January 2018, p. 39. 73 “IHS Jane’s Defence Insight Report: Air Platforms,” June 2013. In 1996, preliminary planning estimated over 3,000 F-35s for DOD and the UK: 2,036 for the Air Force, 642 for the Marines, 300 for the U.S. Navy, and 60 for the Royal Navy. In May 1997, the QDR recommended reducing projected DOD procurement from 2,978 to 2,852: 1,763 for the Air Force, 609 for the Marines, and 480 for the Navy. (Quadrennial Defense Review Cuts Procurement in FY1999, 2000, Aerospace Daily, May 20, 1997, p. 280.) In 2003, the Navy reduced its planned procurement of 1,089 F-35Bs and Cs to 680 aircraft as part of the Navy/Marine Corps Tactical Aviation Integration Plan; that requirement was revised in 2016 to 693. See CRS Report RS21488, Navy-Marine Corps Tactical Air Integration Plan: Background and Issues for Congress, by Christopher Bolkcom and Ronald O'Rourke (out of print; available to congressional clients from the author upon request). See also DOD, Selected Acquisition Report: F-35 Lightning II Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program (F-35), March 19, 2018. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 16 Figure 3. F-35 Procurement Quantities (Figures shown are for production aircraft; table excludes 14 research and development aircraft) Source: Prepared by CRS based on DOD data. Previous DOD plans contemplated increasing the procurement rate of F-35As for the Air Force to a sustained rate of 80 aircraft per year by FY2015, and completing the planned procurement of 1,763 F-35As by about FY2034. The current Air Force plan levels procurement at 48 per year beginning in 2020; the 1,763 fleet target has not changed. Past DOD plans also contemplated increasing the procurement rate of F-35Bs and Cs for the Marine Corps and Navy to a combined sustained rate of 50 aircraft per year by about FY2014, and completing the planned procurement of 680 F-35Bs and Cs by about FY2025. The FY2021 budget submission shows a combined F-35B and -C production rate of 30 per year in 2021, toward a fleet goal of 693. Low-Rate Initial Production F-35s are currently produced under Low-Rate Initial Production (LRIP), with agreements reached for the first 14 lots of aircraft. Each LRIP lot includes both U.S. and international partner aircraft. Contracted unit prices for F-35s have continued to decline with each production lot. “For example, the price (including airframe, engine and profit) of an LRIP Lot 8 aircraft was approximately 3.6 percent less than an LRIP Lot 7 aircraft, and an LRIP Lot 7 aircraft, was 4.2 percent lower than an LRIP Lot 6 aircraft.”74 In LRIPs 5, 6, and 7, any cost overruns associated with concurrent development and production would be split equally between the contractor and the government. Prior to LRIP 4, the government bore those costs alone. Beginning with LRIP 8, the contractor is liable for 100% of any cost overrun; if actual cost is lower than the contracted cost, the contractor will receive 80% of the savings, the government 20%.75 74 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Selected Acquisition Report (SAR): F-35 Joint Strike Fighter Aircraft (F-35), March 21, 2016, p. 9. 75 Colin Clark, “New F-35 Prices: A: $95M; B: $102M; C: $116M,” Breaking Defense, November 21, 2014. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 17 Table 2. F-35 LRIPs 5-11 (Quantity/Cost in millions of dollars, per aircraft) LRIP Lot 5a 6b 7c, d 8e 9f 10g 11h F-35A 22/105 23/103 19/98 19/95 42/102 44/95 102/89 F-35B 3/113 7/109 6/104 6/102 13/132 9/123 25/116 F-35C 7/125 6/120 4/116 4/116 2/132 2/122 14/108 Notes: Aircraft costs for LRIPs 5-8 shown do not include engines. All quantities exclude international orders. a. Christopher Drew, “Lockheed Profit on F-35 Jets Will Rise With New Contract,” The New York Times, December 17, 2012. b. Tony Capaccio, “Lockheed Gets Approval Of Next F-35 Production Contract,” Bloomberg News, July 6, 2012. c. Amy Butler, “Latest F-35 Deal Targets Unit Cost Below $100 Million,” Aviation Week & Space Technology, July 30, 2013. d. Caitlin Lee, “Latest F-35 contracts mark new strategy to reduce costs,” Jane’s Defence Weekly, September 29, 2013. e. Colin Clark, “New F-35 Prices: A: $95M; B: $102M; C: $116M,” Breaking Defense, November 21, 2014. f. Sydney J. Freedberg, Jr., “F-35 ‘Not Out Of Control’: F-35A Prices Drop 5.5%,” Breaking Defense, December 19, 2016, https://breakingdefense.com/2016/12/33483/. g. Lockheed Martin, “Agreement Reached on Lowest Priced F-35s in Program History,” press release, February 3, 2017, https://www.f35.com/news/detail/agreement-reached-on-lowest-priced-f-35s-in-program-history. h. Lockheed Martin, Producing, Operating and Supporting a 5th Generation Fighter, retrieved March 29, 2020, https://www.f35.com/about/cost. Although previous LRIP contracts had been arrived at through negotiation between the F-35 Joint Program Office and Lockheed Martin, the LRIP 9 contract was not agreed to by both sides. After prolonged negotiation, the government invoked its right to issue a unilateral contract.76 F-35 Block Buy The LRIP 11 award, incorporating as it does options for lots 12-14, has been labeled a block buy.77 Block buy contracts commit the government to purchasing certain quantities of aircraft over a number of years, which allows the contractor to acquire parts in greater quantity and plan workforce levels in advance, helping to reduce cost. “By purchasing supplies in economic quantities, Lockheed Martin and Pratt & Whitney estimate that 8 percent and 2.3 percent cost savings, respectively, could be achievable.”78 A 2018 RAND Corporation analysis offered some of the possible savings from a (then-mooted) block buy.79 76 See, inter alia, Colin Clark, “F-35: DoD Forces Lockheed To Accept Its Price For LRIP 9,” Breaking Defense, November 2, 2016, https://breakingdefense.com/2016/11/jpo-to-lockheed-no-more-talkie-heres-lrip-9-deal/. 77 Gareth Jennings, “US DoD awards first block-buy for F-35,” Jane’s Defence Weekly, October 30, 2019, https://www.janes.com/article/92238/us-dod-awards-first-block-buy-for-f-35. 78 U.S. Government Accountability Office, F-35 JOINT STRIKE FIGHTER: Continued Oversight Needed as Program Plans to Begin Development of New Capabilities, 16-390, April 2016, p. 23, http://www.gao.gov/assets/680/676584.pdf. 79 James D. Powers et al., F-35 Block Buy: An Assessment of Potential Savings, RAND Project Air Force, RR2063, Santa Monica, CA, 2018, https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR2000/RR2063/RAND_RR2063.pdf. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 18 What Is Block Buy?80 Block buy contracting (BBC) permits DOD to use a single contract for more than one year’s worth of procurement of a given kind of item without having to exercise a contract option for each year after the first year. It is similar to multiyear procurement in that DOD needs congressional approval for each use of BBC. BBC differs from MYP in the following ways:  There is no permanent statute governing the use of BBC.  There is no requirement that BBC be approved in both a DOD appropriations act and an act other than a DOD appropriations act.  Programs being considered for BBC do not need to meet any legal criteria to qualify for BBC because there is no permanent statute governing the use of BBC that establishes such criteria.  A BBC contract can cover more than five years of planned procurements. The BBC contracts currently being used by the Navy for procuring Littoral Combat Ships, for example, cover a period of seven years (FY2010-FY2016).  Economic order quantity (EOQ) authority does not come automatically as part of BBC authority because there is no permanent statute governing the use of BBC that includes EOQ authority as an automatic feature. To provide EOQ authority as part of a BBC contract, the provision granting authority for using BBC in a program may need to state explicitly that the authority to use BBC includes the authority to use EOQ.  BBC contracts are less likely to include cancellation penalties. “A full block buy, including US jets, could save anywhere from $2 billion to $2.8 billion, according to industry estimates.”81 Congressional approval would be required for a U.S. block buy.82 In related developments, Section 141 of the Fiscal Year 2018 National Defense Authorization Act included language authorizing DOD to enter into economic order quantity contracts for advance parts for F-35s to be procured in FY2019 and FY2020, and the FY2020 NDAA (P.L. 116-92) authorized economic order quantity and buy-to-budget for F-35 aircraft. Program Management The JSF program is jointly managed and staffed by the Department of the Air Force and the Department of the Navy. Service Acquisition Executive (SAE) responsibility alternates between the two departments. When the Air Force has SAE authority, the F-35 program director is from the Navy, and vice versa. Air Force Lt Gen Eric T. Fick became the F-35 program manager, succeeding Navy Vice Admiral Mathias Winter, on July 11, 2019.83 DOD has announced an intention to reorganize F-35 procurement now that the bulk of development has been completed, with procurement responsibilities moving from a central joint 80 Description adapted from CRS Testimony TE10004, The Status of Coast Guard Cutter Acquisition Programs, by Ronald O'Rourke. 81 Valerie Insinna, “Program Head Hints F-35 Contract Could Be Announced at Farnborough,” Defense News, July 9, 2016. 82 For a more detailed discussion of block buy, see CRS Report R41909, Multiyear Procurement (MYP) and Block Buy Contracting in Defense Acquisition: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 83 U.S. Navy, “F-35 Program Sees Changing of Guard,” press release, July 12, 2019, https://www.navy.mil/submit/display.asp?story_id=110201. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 19 office to the military services. (This is consonant with broader congressional direction to decentralize acquisition and increase the acquisition authority of the military services.84) As noted, Congress required DOD to examine alternative F-35 management structures.85 Proponents argued that the overhead structure of a joint office, even if useful in overseeing development of a joint aircraft, is not needed once production has been established. Further, they argue that the F-35 is functionally three separate aircraft, with much less commonality than envisioned early in the program. “[E]ven the Program Executive Officer of the F-35 Joint Program Office, General Christopher Bogdan, recently admitted the variants are only 20–25 percent common.”86 Supporters cited the requirement by the United States to support international customers and to oversee further software and other upgrades as reasons to keep the office in place. In a letter to Congress accompanying that report, Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment Ellen Lord declared an intention to begin a deliberate, conditions-based, and risk-informed transition ... from the existing F-35 management structure to an eventual management structure with separate Service-run F-35A and F-35B/C program offices that are integrated with and report through the individual Military Departments.87 Specific timing of the transition, and the responsibilities to be transferred to the services, have not been announced.88 Software Development You can see from its angled lines, the F-35 is a stealth aircraft designed to evade enemy radars. What you can't see is the 24 million lines of software code which turn it into a flying computer. That’s what makes this plane such a big deal.89 The F-35’s integration of sensors and weapons, both internally and with other aircraft, is touted as its most distinctive aspect. As that integration is primarily realized through complex software, it may not be surprising to observe that writing, validating, and debugging that software is among the program’s greatest challenges. F-35 operating software is released in blocks, with additional capabilities added from one block to the next. I’m concerned about the software, the operational software.... And I’m concerned about the ALIS [Autonomic Logistics Information System], that is another software system, 84 CRS Report R45068, Acquisition Reform in the FY2016-FY2018 National Defense Authorization Acts (NDAAs), by Heidi M. Peters. 85 Section 146 of the FY2017 National Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 114-328). 86 S.Rept. 114-255, p. 280. 87 Letter from Ellen M. Lord, Under Secretary (Acquisition and Sustainment), to Rep. Mac Thornberry, Chairman, House Committee on Armed Services, March 27, 2018. 88 See, inter alia, Oriana Pawlyk, “As Services Take Greater Role on F-35, Joint Program Office to Remain,” Military.com, April 11, 2018, https://www.military.com/dodbuzz/2018/04/11/services-take-greater-role-f-35-joint-program-office-remain.html, Valerie Insinna, “F-35 program head supportive of future transition to service-led offices,” Defense News, April 12, 2018, https://www.defensenews.com/digital-show-dailies/navy-league/2018/04/11/f-35-program-head-supportive-of-future-transition-to-service-led-offices/, and Marc Selinger, “DoD Eyes Shifting F-35 Management To Military Services,” Defense Daily, April 4, 2018. 89 David Martin, “Is the F-35 worth it?,” 60 Minutes, February 16, 2014. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 20 basically that will provide the logistics support to the systems. – Frank Kendall, Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology & Logistics.90 Currently, the ultimate planned software release is Block 4, which will be the first block to contain full combat capability and a complete weapons suite, including conventional weapons like the Small Diameter Bomb II and nuclear capability. However, Block 4 will not be available to all F-35s; it will require aircraft upgraded with Technical Refresh-3 (TR-3) hardware.91 New F-35s are expected to begin delivering with TR-3 in lot 15, scheduled for CY2023.92 Table 3. F-35 Software Block Schedule Block Attributes Released 2B Required for Marine IOC March, 2015 3i (initial) Required for USAF IOC; basic aircraft operation and navigation, some combat capability. August, 2016 3F (final) (now called 30PXX) Required for Navy IOC; expanded combat capability with basic weapons. September, 2017 4 Adds nuclear weapons capability (among other things) Under development Source: Compiled by CRS from various sources. Kendall’s concern was echoed by then-F-35 program manager Air Force Lieutenant General Christopher Bogdan. In testimony to the House Armed Services Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces, he noted that it is the “complexity of the software that worries us the most.... Software development is always really, really tricky... We are going to try and do things in the final block of this capability that are really hard to do.” Among them is forming software that can share the same threat picture among multiple ships across the battlefield, allowing for more coordinated attacks.93 C2D2 Program Beginning in 2018, upgrades to the F-35’s software and other capabilities were combined in an effort now known as Continuous Capability Development and Delivery (C2D2). C2D2’s principal task is developing the Block 4 software, but it includes other elements like TR-3 and dual (nuclear) capability, discussed below. According to the Director of Operational Test and Evaluation, The current Continuous Capability Development and Delivery (C2D2) process has not been able to keep pace with adding new increments of capability as planned. Software 90 Aaron Mehta, “After ‘Transformative’ Year, F-35 Program Focuses on Software, Quantity,” Defense News, January 14, 2014. 91 Valerie Insinna, “F-35 upgrade plan awaiting approval from top Pentagon acquisition exec,” Defense news, October 2, 2018, https://www.defensenews.com/air/2018/10/02/f-35-upgrade-plan-awaiting-approval-from-top-pentagon-acquisition-exec/. 92 Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, FY2019 Annual Report, December 20, 2019, p. 21. 93 Amy Butler, “Bogdan Warns Of Possible Six-Month F-35 Slip After Development Ends,” AviationWeek.com, February 26, 2014. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 21 changes, intended to introduce new capabilities or fix deficiencies, often introduced stability problems and adversely affected other functionality. 94 The Government Accountability Office notes: Although the F-35 program has begun testing Block 4 capabilities, it does not have an approved test and evaluation master plan. The test and evaluation master plan documents the overall structure, strategy, and objectives of the test program as well as the associated resources needed for execution.95 C2D2 Program Oversight A shown in Table 4, the FY2021 budget submission projects the cost of C2D2 as $7.0 billion to FY2025. International partners may contribute to this development effort; according to then-F-35 program executive officer Vice Admiral Mathias Winter in 2018, consortium partners were prepared to contribute $3.7 billion toward Block 4 software development through 2024.96 Some in Congress argue that a program of that size should part with traditional procurement practice for an upgrade and be run as a separate Major Defense Acquisition Program, with its own budget line and the concomitant reporting requirements; language to this effect was included in the Senate’s version of the FY2017 National Defense Authorization Act. This is discussed further in “Issues for Congress,” below. Table 4. C2D2 budgets, FY2021-FY2025 in millions FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24 FY25 Total F-35A 785.336 549.279 450.915 521.012 586.709 2893.251 F-35B 379.549 323.597 294.404 283.981 244.932 1526.463 F-35C 330.386 261.923 246.494 265.615 248.487 1352.905 International 359.626 285.969 211.292 208.053 177.542 1242.482 All 7015.101 Source: FY2021 DOD RDT&E budget submission books for Air Force and Navy. Notes: Only line items specifically designated as C2D2. The $7.0 billion specifically designated for C2D2 may not be the total funding for the program, as Vice Admiral Winter had earlier indicated that just the cost for the Block 4 upgrade was to be more than $10 billion through FY2024.97 Autonomic Logistics Information System The issues cited above focused on software development for the F-35’s onboard mission systems. A supporting system, the Autonomic Logistics Information System (ALIS), also requires 94 Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, FY2019 Annual Report, December 20, 2019, p. 19. 95 U.S. Government Accountability Office, F-35 Joint Strike Fighter: Action Needed to Improve Reliability and Prepare for Modernization Efforts, GAO-19-341, April 2019, p. 17, https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/698748.pdf. 96 Pat Host, “Pentagon faces major cost increase on F-35 Block 4 modernisation,” IHS Jane’s Defence Weekly, March 8, 2018, http://www.janes.com/article/78443/pentagon-faces-major-cost-increase-on-f-35-block-4-modernisation. 97 Pat Host, “Pentagon faces major cost increase on F-35 Block 4 modernisation,” IHS Jane’s Defence Weekly, March 8, 2018, http://www.janes.com/article/78443/pentagon-faces-major-cost-increase-on-f-35-block-4-modernisation. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 22 extensive software development and testing. “ALIS is at the core of operations, maintenance and supply-chain management for the F-35, providing a constant stream of data from the plane to supporting staff.”98 The pace of ALIS development has been cited by service officials as hindering F-35 deployment. DOD’s Director of Operational Test & Evaluation stated that Although the program released several new versions of ALIS in 2019 that improved ALIS usability, these improvements did not eliminate the major problems in ALIS design and implementation. These deficiencies caused delays in troubleshooting and returning broken aircraft to mission capable status.99 GAO reported that ALIS may not be deployable: ALIS requires server connectivity and the necessary infrastructure to provide power to the system. The Marine Corps, which often deploys to austere locations, declared in July 2015 its ability to operate and deploy the F-35 without conducting deployability tests of ALIS. A newer version of ALIS was put into operation in the summer of 2015, but DOD has not yet completed comprehensive deployability tests. ALIS does not have redundant infrastructure: ALIS’s current design results in all F-35 data produced across the U.S. fleet to be routed to a Central Point of Entry and then to ALIS’s main operating unit with no backup system or redundancy. If either of these fail, it could take the entire F-35 fleet offline.100 To date, the F-35’s operators have been coping with ALIS’s shortcomings. “Most capabilities function as intended only with a high level of manual effort by ALIS administrators and maintenance personnel. Manual work-arounds are often needed to complete tasks designed to be automated.”101 Air Force Lt. Gen. Chris Bogdan told reporters that the plane could fly without the $16.7 billion ... ALIS for at least 30 days. The software, which runs on ground computers, not the plane itself, manages the aircraft’s supply chain, aircraft configuration, fault diagnostics, mission planning, and debriefing – none of which are critical to combat flight.102 ALIS Replacement Some of the problems with ALIS reportedly stem from its 1990s-based architecture.103 DOD is replacing ALIS with a new technology system called ODIN, for Operational Data Integrated Network.104 98 Aaron Mehta, “After ‘Transformative’ Year, F-35 Program Focuses on Software, Quantity,” Defense News, January 14, 2014. 99 Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, FY2019 Annual Report, December 20, 2019, p. 20. 100 U.S. Government Accountability Office, F-35 Sustainment: DOD Needs a Plan to Address Risks Related to Its Central Logistics System, 16-439, April 14, 2016. 101 Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, FY2017 Annual Report, January 2018, p. 53. 102 Patrick Tucker, “F-35 Will Fly Despite Auditor’s Fleet-Grounding Warning,” Defense One, April 17, 2016. 103 Lara Seligman, “F-35 Sustainment Challenges Mount As Global Fleet Grows,” Aviation Week and Space Technology, April 5, 2018, http://aviationweek.com/defense/f-35-sustainment-challenges-mount-global-fleet-grows. 104 See, inter alia, John A. Tirpak, “F-35 Program Dumps ALIS for ODIN,” Air Force, January 21, 2020, https://www.airforcemag.com/f-35-program-dumps-alis-for-odin/. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 23 ODIN is designed to be more user-friendly and less prone to error. Program officials decided to replace ALIS rather than upgrading it further in order to take advantage of modern programming architectures. “We have old hardware, we have old operating systems… if we were ever going to get to a modern software architecture, modernizing ALIS wasn’t going to get us there. [Replacement is] so that we can leverage all the things that have happened in software development over the last couple of decades. The code in this airplane is old… it’s frankly going to take a couple of years for this to all iron itself out.”105 ODIN will work with F-35s that have the Technical Refresh-3 hardware package, beginning with acquisition Lot 15 in 2023. That package includes a new integrated core processor, panoramic cockpit display, and an enhanced memory unit. The company intends to incorporate TR3 in F-35s starting in Lot 15, with those jets rolling off the production lot in 2023.106 Earlier F-35s will, at least initially, continue with ALIS version 3.5, which is being refreshed “roughly every 120 days or so.” “ALIS 3.5 is going to be the core … capability for our sustainers until we get ODIN up and online.”107 Dual Capability Some F-35As will be dual capable aircraft (DCA), meaning that they will have the ability to deliver nuclear ordnance. Dual capability is expected to be included in the Block 4 software release, with initial capability for the B61-12 weapon.108 The F-35A DCA is scheduled to achieve nuclear certification in January, 2023.109 Funding for DCA development had been carried in Air Force PE 0207142F, under F-35 Squadrons. In the FY2021 budget request, it appears as part of C2D2, PE 0604840F. Requested funding in FY2021 is $106.136 million, with a total projected request through 2025 of $186.678 million. 105 Brigadier General David Abba, Director of the F-35 Integration Office, Headquarters U.S. Air Force, “Briefing to the Mitchell Institute,” Arlington, VA, March 9, 2020, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DPvKWp7tSqY. 106 Valerie Insinna, “Lockheed hypes F-35’s upgrade plan as interest in ‘sixth-gen’ fighters grows,” Defense News, June 21, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/digital-show-dailies/paris-air-show/2019/06/21/lockheed-hypes-f-35s-upgrade-plan-as-interest-in-sixth-gen-fighters-grows/. 107 Brigadier General David Abba, op.cit. 108 Testimony of Lt Gen Christopher C. Bogdan, F-35 Program Executive Officer, before the U.S. Congress, House Committee on Armed Services, Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces, Military Services Fifth–Generation Tactical Aircraft Challenges and F–35 Joint Strike Fighter Program Update, 115th Cong., 1st sess., February 16, 2017, H.A.S.C. No. 115–6 (Washington: GPO, 2017), p. 17. For more on the B61, see CRS Report RL33640, U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces: Background, Developments, and Issues, by Amy F. Woolf. 109 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Selected Acquisition Report (SAR): F-35 Joint Strike Fighter Aircraft (F-35), March 17, 2019, p. 14. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 24 Cost and Funding110 Total Program Acquisition Cost111 As of December 2019, the total estimated acquisition cost (the sum of development, procurement, and military construction [MilCon] costs) of the F-35 program in constant (i.e., inflation-adjusted) FY2012 dollars was about $340.5 billion, including about $70.3 billion in research and development, about $265.6 billion in procurement, and about $4.5 billion in MilCon.112 In then-year dollars (meaning dollars from various years that are not adjusted for inflation), the figures are about $428.3 billion, including about $67.9 billion in research and development, about $355.3 billion in procurement, and about $5.2 billion in military construction. Prior-Year Funding Through FY2018, the F-35 program has received a total of roughly $137.6 billion of funding in then-year dollars, including about $56.9 billion in research and development, about $78.2 billion in procurement, and approximately $2.4 billion in military construction. Unit Costs As of December 2018, the F-35 program had a program acquisition unit cost (or PAUC, meaning total acquisition cost divided by the 2,470 research and development and procurement aircraft) of about $118.3 million and an average procurement unit cost (or APUC, meaning total procurement cost divided by the 2,456 production aircraft) of $94.0 million, in constant FY2012 dollars. However, this reflects the cost of the aircraft without its engine, as the engine program was broken out as a separate reporting line in 2011. As of December 2019, the F-35 engine program had a program acquisition unit cost of about $22.0 million and an average procurement unit cost of $16.7 million in constant FY2012 dollars. Just as the reported airframe costs represent a program average and do not discriminate among the variants, those engine costs do not discriminate between the single engines used in the F-35A and C and the more expensive engine/lift fan combination for the F-35B. However, beginning in December 2016, DOD’s Selected Acquisition Reports broke out unit recurring flyaway costs of the three engines as well as the separate airframes, as follows: 110 The F-35 program receives (or in the past received) funding from the Air Force, Navy, and Defense-Wide research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E) accounts (the Defense-Wide RDT&E funding occurred in FY1996-FY1998); Non-Treasury Funds (i.e., financial contributions from the eight other countries participating in the F-35 program)—a source of additional research and development funding; the Air Force and Navy aircraft procurement accounts (the Navy and Marine Corps are organized under the Department of the Navy, and Marine Corps aircraft development and procurement costs are funded through the Navy’s RDT&E and aircraft procurement accounts); and the Air Force MilCon account and the Navy and Marine Corps MilCon account. 111 Figures in this section come from Office of the Secretary of Defense, Selected Acquisition Report (SAR): F-35 Joint Strike Fighter Aircraft (F-35), March 17, 2019. 112 The procurement cost figure of about $265.6 billion does not include the cost of several hundred additional F-35s that are to be procured other countries that are participating in the F-35 program. The figure does, however, assume certain production-cost benefits for DOD aircraft that result from producing F-35s for other countries. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 25 Table 5. F-35 Projected Unit Recurring Flyaway Cost (Assumes 741 international sales) $M (2012) F-35A F-35B F-35C Airframe 69.5 80.0 79.5 Engine 11.1 27.0 11.2 Total 80.6 107.2 90.7 Source: Office of the Secretary of Defense, Selected Acquisition Report (SAR): F-35 Joint Strike Fighter Aircraft (F-35), March 17, 2019. Note: Versions of this chart prior to FY2018 assumed 2443 US sales and 612-673 international sales rather than 2456/741. Critics note that the costs reported in the Selected Acquisition Reports contain a number of assumptions about future inflation rates, production learning curves, and other factors, and argue that these figures do not accurately represent the true cost of developing and acquiring the F-35.113 Other Cost Issues Acquisition Cost and Long-Term Affordability Over time, as the program has matured and unit costs have decreased in succeeding procurement lots, attention on F-35 costs has shifted. The acquisition cost of the program is still large, and as DOD considers the prospect of flat budgets for the future, other programs increasingly compete with the F-35 for budget share. The Government Accountability Office, for example, has increasingly questioned DOD’s ability to afford the current F-35 program given other demands on budgets. This is a contrast to earlier reports, which focused more on the program’s ability to meet its cost targets. More recently, though, attention has moved to long-term affordability and sustainment costs, as discussed below. Unit Cost Projections The F-35 program had long established a goal of making the F-35 cost-competitive with previous-generation aircraft. (It should be noted that the articles cited below reference the cost of the F-35A, the simplest model.) F-35 fighter jets will sell for as little as $80 million in five years, according to the Pentagon official running the program. “The cost of an F-35A in 2019 will be somewhere between $80 and $85 million, with an engine, with profit, with inflation,” U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General Christopher Bogdan, the Pentagon’s manager of the program, told reporters in Canberra today.114 113 A detailed critique of the SAR figures with suggestions for alternatives appeared in Time magazine’s “Battleland” blog. Authored by Winslow Wheeler of the Center for Defense Information, the most relevant entries are http://nation.time.com/2013/06/04/alphabet-soup-paucs-apucs-urfs-cost-variances-and-other-pricing-dodges/ and http://nation.time.com/2013/06/05/the-deadly-empirical-data/. 114 Jason Scott, “F-35s to Sell for as Low as $80 Million in 2019, Pentagon Says,” Bloomberg.com, March 11, 2014. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 26 That article dated from 2014. More recently, efforts were increased to reach the same target: [Lockheed Martin] will invest up to $170 million over the next two years to extend its existing “Blueprint for Affordability” measure ... to drive down the unit cost of an F-35A to $85 million by 2019.115 As noted in Table 5, the average unit flyaway cost of an F-35A is officially projected at $80.6 million in constant 2012 dollars. However, according to the recent agreement on F-35 production lot 11, an F-35A “is set to decrease from a Lot 11 price of $89.2 million to $82.4 million in Lot 12; $79.2 million in Lot 13; and $77.9 million in Lot 14.”116 Engine Costs In 2013, engine maker Pratt & Whitney embarked on a program to reduce the F-35 engine’s cost.117 Following release of data showing the “cost of acquiring the planned 2,443 airframes and associated systems rose 1%, while engine costs climbed 6.7%,”118 the program manager reportedly singled out Pratt for criticism “after having improved relations with the F-35’s prime contractor, Lockheed Martin Corp., securing lower prices for each batch of new airframes and closing deals far quicker than in the past.”119 Subsequently, Pratt & Whitney has signed contracts for engines through LRIP 11 that show a steady percentage decrease in cost. The LRIP 11 announcement did not included a dollar figure for the engines, instead citing percentage decreases in cost. “[Pratt & Whitney] is claiming competitive privilege in its sole-source deal for F-35 engines in not releasing its actual numbers.”120 Pratt says that “in general, the unit recurring flyaway (URF) price for the 110 LRIP Lot 11 conventional takeoff and landing and carrier variant propulsion systems will be reduced 0.34 percent from the previously negotiated LRIP Lot 10 URF. The URF price for the 25 LRIP Lot 11 short takeoff and vertical landing propulsion systems (including lift systems) will be reduced 3.39 percent from the previously negotiated LRIP Lot 10 URF.”121 The issue of engine cost transparency is addressed in “Issues for Congress,” below. Anticipated Upgrade Costs The degree of concurrency in the F-35 program, in which aircraft are being produced while the design is still being revised through testing, has made upgrades to early-production aircraft inevitable. “For all F-35 variants, structural and durability testing led to significant discoveries 115 Valerie Insinna, “Lockheed Extends F-35 Cost-Cutting Initiative To Save Billions,” Defense News, July 11, 2016. 116 Valerie Insinna, “In newly inked deal, F-35 price falls to $78 million a copy,” Defense News, October 29, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/air/2019/10/29/in-newly-inked-deal-f-35-prices-fall-to-78-million-a-copy/. 117 Andrea Shalal, “Pratt must push harder to cut F-35 engine cost -Pentagon,” Reuters.com, April 7, 2014. 118 Doug Cameron, “Pentagon official criticizes Pratt & Whitney,” Marketwatch.com, April 17, 2014. 119 Ibid. 120 Ibid. 121 Pratt & Whitney, “Pratt & Whitney and F-35 Program Office Announce Contract Award for 135 F135 Engines,” press release, May 31, 2018, https://utc.com/en/news/PW/2018/05/31/pratt-whitney-and-f-35-program-office-announce-contract-award-for-135-f135-engi. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 27 requiring repairs and modifications to production designs, some as late as Lot 12 aircraft, and retrofits to fielded aircraft.”122 The cost of those upgrades may vary, depending on what revisions are made during the testing process. However, the cost of such upgrades is not included in the negotiated price of each production lot. The first F-35As, for example, were loaded with a basic software release (Block 1B) that provides basic aircraft control, but does not have the degree of sensor fusion or weapons integration expected in later blocks. “The initial estimate for modifying early-production F-35As from a basic configuration to a capable warfighting level is $6 million per jet, plus other associated expenses not included in that figure.”123 That would make the current cost of upgrading the earliest F-35As to Block 3F about $100 million. In order to increase capability, the Air Force intends to upgrade the aircraft step-by-step as new software releases become available rather than waiting and jumping to the final release of Block 3F. The cost of the major upgrade to Block 4 is discussed in “Issues for Congress,” below. Operating and Support Costs Since 2015, Selected Acquisition Report projected lifetime operating and sustainment costs for the F-35 fleet have been estimated at over $1 trillion,124 “which DOD officials have deemed unaffordable. The program’s long term sustainment estimates reflect assumptions about key cost drivers that the program does not control, including fuel costs, labor costs, and inflation rates.”125 “The eye-popping estimate has raised hackles at the Defense Department and on Capitol Hill since it was disclosed in 2011. It covers the cost of fuel, spare parts, logistics support and repairs.”126 It may be worth noting that “the F-35 was ... the first big Pentagon weapons program to be evaluated using a 50-year lifetime cost estimate—about 20 years longer than most programs—which made the program seem artificially more expensive.”127 Operations and sustainment costs as of the December 2019 Selected Acquisition Report were reported at $630.5 billion in 2012 dollars (or $1.2 trillion in then-year dollars). “The operation and sustainment cost is a bigger issue,” (then-Air Force acquisition chief William) LaPlante said. “It’s the one that will say whether or not we can afford (the F-35) in the longer run.”128 Operations costs are being addressed on several fronts, including changes in training, basing, support, and other approaches. 122 Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, FY2019 Annual Report, December 20, 2019, p. 23. 123 Gabe Starosta, “Block Upgrades For Earliest F-35s To Cost $6M Per Aircraft,” InsideDefense.com, March 26, 2014. 124 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Selected Acquisition Report (SAR): F-35, editions for December, 2011 through December, 2019. 125 U.S. Government Accountability Office, F-35 JOINT STRIKE FIGHTER: Problems Completing Software Testing May Hinder Delivery of Expected Warfighting Capabilities, GAO-14-322, March 2014, p. 12. 126 Sandra I. Erwin, “Next Battle for F-35: Bring Down Operations Costs,” National Defense (nationaldefensemagazine.org), April 6, 2014. 127 Marine Corps Assistant Commandant for Aviation Lt. Gen. Terry Robling, cited in Andrea Shalal-Esa, “Lifetime cost to run F-35 fighter: about $1 trillion,” Reuters.com, February 26, 2012. 128 Andrea Shalal, “U.S. focuses on cheaper, more reliable F-35 jet: Air Force official,” Reuters.com, April 1, 2014. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 28 To attack this problem, the F-35 program office in October 2013 set up a “cost war room” in Arlington, Va.... A team of government and contractor representatives assigned to the cost war room are investigating 48 different ways to reduce expenses. They are also studying options for future repair and maintenance of F-35 aircraft in the United States and abroad.129 The U.S. Air Force is looking to slash the number of locations where it will base F-35 Joint Strike Fighter squadrons to bring down the jet’s estimated trillion-dollar sustainment costs.... “When you reduce the number of bases from 40 to the low 30s, you end up reducing your footprint, making more efficient the long-term sustainment,” David Van Buren, the service’s acquisition executive, said in a March 2 exit interview at the Pentagon.130 More recently, “Lockheed, Northrop and BAE are also starting a ‘sustainment cost reduction initiative’ aimed at cutting operations and maintenance expenses by 10 percent during fiscal 2018 through fiscal 2022. The vendors will invest $250 million and hope to reap at least $1 billion in savings over five years.”131 Manufacturing Locations The F-35 is manufactured in several locations. Lockheed Martin builds the aircraft’s forward section in Fort Worth, TX. Northrop Grumman builds the midsection in Palmdale, CA, and the tail is built by BAE Systems in the United Kingdom.132 Final assembly of these components takes place in Fort Worth. Final assembly and checkout facilities have also been established in Cameri, Italy, and Nagoya, Japan. The Pratt & Whitney F135 engine for the F-35 is produced in East Hartford and Middletown, CT. Rolls-Royce builds the F-35B lift system in Indianapolis, IN. Basing On December 21, 2017, the Air Force announced Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base Fort Worth, TX, as the preferred alternative for the first F-35A reserve component base. Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, AZ; Homestead Air Reserve Base, FL; and Whiteman AFB, MO, were also candidate bases. At the same time, Truax Field, WI, and Dannelly Field, AL, were announced as the next Air National Guard F-35A bases, with aircraft slated to arrive in 2023. Gowen Field ANGB, ID; Selfridge ANGB, MI; and Jacksonville Air Guard Station, FL, were also considered. Burlington Air National Guard Base, VT, had previously been selected.133 Active component F-35As had already been announced as going to Hill AFB, UT, and RAF Lakenheath, England. Eielson AFB, AK, had earlier been announced as the preferred base for the first overseas F-35 squadron.134 Luke AFB, AZ, and Eglin AFB, FL, are the main F-35 training bases. F-35As also operate from Edwards AFB, CA, and Nellis AFB, NV. 129 Sandra I. Erwin, “Next Battle for F-35: Bring Down Operations Costs,” National Defense (nationaldefensemagazine.org), April 6, 2014. 130 Marcus Weisgerber, “USAF Eyes Deep Cuts To F-35 Bases,” Defense News, March 3, 2012. 131 Valerie Insinna, “Lockheed Extends F-35 Cost-Cutting Initiative To Save Billions,” Defense News, July 11, 2016. 132 CRS site visit to Palmdale, CA, March 10, 2016. 133 U.S. Air Force, “AF selects locations for next two Air National Guard F-35 bases,” press release, December 21, 2017, https://go.usa.gov/xQTRw. 134 Secretary of the Air Force Public Affairs, “Eielson AFB selected as preferred alternative for first overseas-based F-35As,” press release, August 4, 2014, http://go.usa.gov/xxhNw. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 29 In the United States, Marine F-35s are based at Marine Corps Air Stations Yuma, AZ, and Beaufort, SC. Navy F-35s fly from Naval Air Stations Lemoore, CA, and Patuxent River, MD. International Participation In General The F-35 program is DOD’s largest international cooperative program. DOD has actively pursued allied participation as a way to defray some of the cost of developing and producing the aircraft, and to “prime the pump” for export sales of the aircraft.135 Allies in turn view participation in the F-35 program as an affordable way to acquire a fifth-generation strike fighter, technical knowledge in areas such as stealth, and industrial opportunities for domestic firms. Eight allied countries—the United Kingdom, Canada, Denmark, The Netherlands, Norway, Italy, Turkey, and Australia—initially participated in the F-35 program under a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for the SDD and Production, Sustainment, and Follow-On Development (PSFD) phases of the program. These eight countries have contributed varying amounts of research and development funding to the program, receiving in return various levels of participation in the program. International partners are also assisting with Initial Operational Test and Evaluation (IOT&E), a subset of SDD.136 The partner countries are expected to purchase hundreds of F-35s, with the United Kingdom’s 138 being the largest anticipated foreign fleet.137 As noted, Turkey’s participation in the F-35 program was subsequently curtailed. The circumstances of that change are described in CRS Report R41761, Turkey-U.S. Defense Cooperation: Prospects and Challenges, by Jim Zanotti, and CRS Report R41368, Turkey: Background and U.S. Relations, by Jim Zanotti and Clayton Thomas. Two additional countries—Israel and Singapore—are security cooperation participants outside the F-35 cooperative development partnership.138 Israel has agreed to purchase 33 F-35s, and may want as many as 50.139 Japan chose the F-35 as its next fighter in October 2011,140 and South Korea committed to the F-35 in 2014.141 Sales to additional countries are possible. Some officials 135 Congress insisted from the outset that the JAST program include ongoing efforts by DARPA to develop more advanced STOVL aircraft, opening the way for UK participation in the program. 136 Currently, the UK, Italy, and the Netherlands have agreed to participate in the IOT&E program. UK, the senior F-35 partner, will have the strongest participation in the IOT&E phase. Italy and the Netherlands are contributing a far smaller amount and will take part only in the coalition concept of operations (CONOPS) validation testing. (Telephone conversation with OSD/AT&L, October 3, 2007.) Other partner nations are still weighing their option to participate in the IOT&E program. The benefits to participation are expedited acquisition of aircraft, pilot training for the test cycle, and access to testing results. 137 Gareth Jennings, “UK to approve bulk F-35B buy in 2017,” IHS Jane’s 360, February 6, 2014. 138 DOD offers Foreign Military Sales (FMS)-level of participation in the F-35 program for countries unable to commit to partnership in the program’s SDD phase. Israel and Singapore are believed to have contributed $50 million each, and are “Security Cooperative Participants.” (Selected Acquisition Report, Office of the Secretary of Defense for Acquisition. December 31, 2005.) 139 Bob Cox, “Israeli government ok’s F-35 buy,” Fort Worth Star-Telegram, September 16, 2010. Yaakov Lappin, “Israel, US Sign F-35 Agreement,” Jerusalem Post, October 8, 2010, and Lara Seligman, “Israeli Air Chief Asks For 17 More F-35s,” Aerospace Daily & Defense Report, June 23, 2016. 140 Paul Kallender-Umezu, “Japan F-X Competition Win Victory for JSF Program,” Defense News, December 20, 2011. 141 Choe Sang-hun, “South Korea Formally Announces Intent to Buy 40 Lockheed Fighter Jets,” The New York Times, September 24, 2014. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 30 have speculated that foreign sales of F-35s might eventually surpass 2,000 or even 3,000 aircraft.142 Sales to Israel, Japan, and South Korea are conducted through the standard Foreign Military Sales process, including congressional notification. F-35 sales to nations in the consortium, conducted under 22 U.S.C. 2767, are not reviewed by Congress.143 The UK is the most significant international partner in terms of financial commitment, and the only Level 1 partner.144 On December 20, 1995, the U.S. and UK governments signed an MOU on British participation in the JSF program as a collaborative partner in the definition of requirements and aircraft design. This MOU committed the British government to contribute $200 million toward the cost of the 1997-2001 Concept Demonstration Phase.145 On January 17, 2001, the U.S. and UK governments signed an MOU finalizing the UK’s participation in the SDD phase, with the UK committing to spending $2 billion, equating to about 8% of the estimated cost of SDD. A number of UK firms, such as BAE and Rolls-Royce, participate in the F-35 program.146 142 Andrea Shalal-Esa, “Pentagon sees 6,000 possible F-35 sales,” Reuters.com, June 17, 2009. See also Marina Malenic, “F-35 Sales Could Double As Countries Look To Replace Aging Fleets, General Says,” Defense Daily, June 18, 2009: 6, and Marcus Weisgerber, “JSF Program Anticipates Nearly 700 F-35 Buys [For International Customers] Between FY-09 and FY-23, Inside the Air Force, July 31, 2009. 143 Correspondence to CRS from F-35 Joint Program Office, January 31, 2018. For more details on the Foreign Military Sales process, see CRS In Focus IF11437, Transfer of Defense Articles: Foreign Military Sales (FMS), by Nathan J. Lucas and Michael J. Vassalotti. 144 International participation in the F-35 program is divided into three levels, according to the amount of money a country contributes to the program—the higher the amount, the greater the nation’s voice with respect to aircraft requirements, design, and access to technologies gained during development. Level 1 Partner status requires approximately 10% contribution to aircraft development and allows for fully integrated office staff and a national deputy at director level. Level II partners consist of Italy and the Netherlands, contributing $1 billion and $800 million, respectively. On June 24, 2002, Italy became the senior Level II partner (“F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Lightning II: International Partners,” http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/systems/aircraft/f-35-int.htm). Italy wants to have its own F-35 final assembly line, which would be in addition to the existing F-35 maintenance and upgrade facility. The Netherlands signed on to the F-35 program on June 17, 2002, after it had conducted a 30-month analysis of potential alternatives. Australia, Denmark, Norway, Canada, and Turkey joined the F-35 program as Level III partners, with contributions ranging from $125 million to $175 million. (“Australia, Belgium Enter Joint Strike Fighter Program as EMD Partners,” Inside the Air Force, April 21, 2000.) Unlike the SDD phase, PSFD phase does not make any distinction as to levels of participation. Also unlike the bilateral SDD MOUs, there is a single PSFD MOU for all partner nations. In signing the PSFD MOU, partner nations state their intentions to purchase the F-35, including quantity and variant, and a determination is made as to their delivery schedule. PSFD costs will be divided on a “fair-share” based on the programmed purchase amount of the respective nation. So-called “offset” arrangements, considered the norm in defense contracts with foreign nations, usually require additional incentives to compensate the purchasing nation for the agreement’s impact to its local workforce. F-35 officials decided to take a different approach, in line with the program’s goal to control costs, to avoid offset arrangements and promote competition as much as possible. Consequently, all partner nations have agreed to compete for work on a “best-value” basis and have signed the PSFD MOU. 145 “U.S., U.K. Sign JAST Agreement,” Aerospace Daily, December 21, 1995, p. 451. 146 BAE is a major partner to Lockheed Martin and is providing the aft fuselage, empennage, and electronic warfare suite for the aircraft. Rolls-Royce is partnered with GE on the F136 engine and is a subcontractor to Pratt and Whitney for producing components for the F-35B’s STOVL lift system. In October 2009, Rolls Royce broke ground on a new plant in Virginia to make parts for the F136 engine. (Rolls Royce press release, “Rolls-Royce expands US capability; begins construction on new manufacturing facility in Virginia,” October 19, 2009, available at http://www.rolls-royce.com/investors/news/2009/091019_manufacturing_virginia.jsp.) Rolls Royce’s 2001 contract with Pratt and Whitney for design and development of the STOVL lift components is valued at $1 billion over 10 years. (“Rolls-Royce Finishes First JSF Propulsion System Flight Hardware,” Rolls-Royce Media Room, available at F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 31 International Sales Quantities The cost of F-35s for U.S. customers depends in part on the total quantity of F-35s produced. As the program has proceeded, some new customers have emerged, such as South Korea and Japan, mentioned above. Other countries have considered increasing their buys, while some have deferred previous plans to buy F-35s. It is perhaps noteworthy that the latest Selected Acquisition Reports increased the number of assumed international sales for cost purposes from 612 to 741.147 Recent updates to other countries’ purchase plans are detailed in “Changes in International Orders,” above. Other international competitions in which the F-35 is or could be a candidate include the following: Nation Plans Candidates Finland Studying options to replace early model F/A-18 Hornets. Type selection could be made in 2020, and officials have said only Western fighters are being considered. Gripen believed to have an edge. Spain Operating Eurofighter and F/A-18 Hornet for the foreseeable future. Spain wants to replace its Hornets with an unmanned combat aircraft in the late 2020s or 2030s. May also have to consider F-35B to maintain a fixed-wing fast jet from its small carrier. Germany Looking to replace 85 Panavia Tornados. No formal contest announced, but the German MoD has reportedly received classified briefings on the F-35. Switzerland Looking to replace F-18s with 30 or 40 new fighters. Eurofighter Typhoon, Boeing F-18, Dassault Rafale, F-35A and Saab Gripen E Source: Tony Osborne, “Fighter Aircraft Procurement Plans Of 19 European Countries,” Aviation Week, June 29, 2016, http://aviationweek.com/defense/fighter-aircraft-procurement-plans-19-european-countries-0, Gareth Jennings, “Germany declares preference for F-35 to replace Tornado,” IHS Jane’s Defence Weekly, November 8, 2017, http://www.janes.com/article/75511/germany-declares-preference-for-f-35-to-replace-tornado, and Sebastian Sprenger, “The F-35 and other warplanes descend on Switzerland this spring,” Defense News, April 11, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/global/europe/2019/04/11/the-f-35-and-other-warplanes-descend-on-switzerland-this-spring/. Edited and supplemented by CRS. As noted, a significant question remains over whether Canada will continue as an F-35 partner. The Trudeau government repudiated the previously announced purchase of 65 (which had originally been 80). Subsequent plans to acquire F-18s instead have been put on hold. Lockheed Martin has stated that if Canada withdraws as a customer, Canadian work share will suffer.148 Work Shares and Technology Transfer DOD and foreign partners in the JSF program have occasionally disagreed over the issues of work shares and proprietary technology. For example, the United States rejected a South Korean http://www.rolls-royce.com/media/showPR.jsp?PR_ID=40243.) All F-35Bs, regardless of what engine they use, are to employ Rolls Royce components in their STOVL lift systems. 147 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Selected Acquisition Report (SAR): F-35 Joint Strike Fighter Aircraft (F-35), editions of 2016-2019. 148 Aaron Mehta, “No System in Place To Strip Canadian F-35 Participation,” Defense News, July 11, 2016. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 32 request for transfer of four F-35 technologies that could assist in the development of a Korean indigenous fighter program (although 21 other technologies were approved).149 The governments of Italy and the United Kingdom have lobbied for F-35 assembly facilities to be established in their countries. In July 2010, Lockheed and the Italian firm Alenia Aeronautica reached an agreement to establish an F-35 final assembly and checkout facility at Cameri Air Base, Italy, to deliver aircraft for Italy and the Netherlands. The facility opened in July 2013.150 A similar facility has opened in Nagoya, Japan, with the first aircraft delivered in 2017.151 Norway and the Netherlands will host engine overhaul and logistics facilities Turkey had been scheduled to until its exclusion from the program. Proposed FY2021 Budget Table 6 shows the Administration’s FY2021 request for Air Force and Navy research and development and procurement funding for the F-35 program, along with FY2019 and FY2020 funding levels. Table 7 shows the procurement request in greater detail. Table 6. FY2021 F-35 Funding Request (Figures in millions of then-year dollars) FY2019 FY2020 FY2021 (request) Funding Quantity Funding Quantity Funding Quantity RDT&E funding Dept. of Navy 566.0 — 749.0 — 794.0 Air Force 558.0 — 750.0 — 923.0 Subtotal 1,124.0 — 1,499.0 — 1,717.0 Procurement funding Dept. of Navy 5,048.0 37 4,642.0 36 3,924.6 31 Air Force 5,267.0 56 6,060.0 62 5,177.8 48 Subtotal 10,315.0 93 10,702.0 98 9,102.4 79 Mods 304.0 411.0 632.0 TOTAL 11,743.0 93 12,612.0 98 11,400.4 79 Source: Program Acquisition Costs by Weapons System, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, February 2020. Note: Figures shown do not include funding for MilCon funding or research and development funding provided by other countries. Table 7. FY2021 F-35 Procurement Request All dollars in millions F-35A F-35B F-35C Quantity 48 10 20 149 Jung Sung-ki, “Tech Transfer Hobbles South Korea’s Fighter Program,” Defense News, September 27, 2015, and Jon Grevatt, “US approves F-35 offset technology transfer to South Korea,” IHS Jane’s Defence Industry, December 21, 2016. 150 Craig Hoyle, “An Italian view on the F-35,” Flightglobal.com/DEW Line blog, August 7, 2013. 151 Amy Butler, “First F-35 Assembled In Italy To Roll Out Early Next Year,” Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, December 10, 2014, and David Cenciotti, “The First Japanese-Built F-35A Unveiled At Nagoya Production Facility In Japan,” The Aviationist, June 5, 2017, https://theaviationist.com/2017/06/05/the-first-japanese-built-f-35a-unveiled-at-nagoya-production-facility-in-japan/. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 33 F-35A F-35B F-35C Procurement cost 5,293.5 1,358.9 2,500.2 Less previous advance procurement 726.5 249.6 280.5 Subtotal 4,567.0 1,109.4 2,181.7 Advance procurement for future aircraft 610.8 303.0 330.4 Spares 294.6 194.6 112.3 Total FY21 request 5,472.4 1,607.5 2,624.4 Average procurement cost per aircraft 110.2 135.9 100.9 Source: February 2020 DOD justification books. Issues for Congress Overall Need for F-35 The F-35’s cutting-edge capabilities are accompanied by significant costs. Some analysts have suggested that upgrading existing aircraft might offer sufficient capability at a lower cost, and that such an approach makes more sense in a budget-constrained environment. Others have produced or endorsed studies proposing a mix of F-35s and upgraded older platforms; yet others have called for terminating the F-35 program entirely. Congress has considered the requirement for F-35s on many occasions and has held hearings, revised funding, and added oversight language to defense bills. As the arguments for and against the F-35 change, the program matures, and/or the budgetary situation changes, Congress may wish to consider the value of possible alternatives, keeping in mind the program progress thus far, funds expended, evolving world air environment, and the value of potential capabilities unique to the F-35. Planned Total Procurement Quantities A potential issue for Congress concerns the total number of F-35s to be procured. As mentioned above, planned production totals for the various versions of the F-35 were left unchanged by a number of reviews. Since then, considerable new information has appeared regarding cost growth and budget constraints that may challenge the ability to maintain the expected procurement quantities. “’I think we are to the point in our budgetary situation where, if there is unanticipated cost growth, we will have to accommodate it by reducing the buy,’ said Undersecretary of Defense Robert Hale, then Pentagon comptroller.”152 Some observers, noting potential limits on future U.S. defense budgets, potential changes in adversary capabilities, and competing defense-spending priorities, have suggested reducing planned total procurement quantities for the F-35. A September 2009 report on future Air Force strategy, force structure, and procurement by the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, for example, states that [A]t some point over the next two decades, short-range, non-stealthy strike aircraft will likely have lost any meaningful deterrent and operational value as anti-access/area denial systems proliferate. They will also face major limitations in both irregular warfare and operations against nuclear-armed regional adversaries due to the increasing threat to 152 Marina Malenic, “DoD Comptroller: Further F-35 Cost Growth Jeopardizes Buy Quantity,” Defense Daily, March 4, 2010. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 34 forward air bases and the proliferation of modern air defenses. At the same time, such systems will remain over-designed – and far too expensive to operate – for low-end threats.... Reducing the Air Force plan to buy 1,763 F-35As through 2034 by just over half, to 858 F-35As, and increasing the [annual F-35A] procurement rate to end [F-35A procurement] in 2020 would be a prudent alternative. This would provide 540 combat-coded F-35As on the ramp, or thirty squadrons of F-35s[,] by 2021[, which would be] in time to allow the Air Force budget to absorb other program ramp ups[,] like NGB [the next-generation bomber, B-21].153 Block 4/C2D2 as a Separate Program Development of the F-35 Block 4 software, part of an effort now called Continuous Capability Development and Delivery (C2D2), is expected to cost as much as $10.8 billion over the next six years.154 “The F-35 Joint Program Office (JPO) plans to transition into the next phase of development – Continuous Capability Development and Delivery (C2D2) – beginning in CY18, to address deficiencies identified in Block 3F development and to incrementally provide planned Block 4 capabilities.”155 “The JPO’s latest plan for F-35 follow-on modernization ... C2D2, relies heavily on agile software development—smaller, incremental updates to the F-35’s software and hardware instead of one big drop, with the goal of speeding follow-on upgrades while still fixing remaining deficiencies in the Block 3F software load.”156 Some in Congress argue that a program of that size should part with traditional procurement practice for an upgrade and be run as a separate Major Defense Acquisition Program (MDAP), with its own budget line and the concomitant reporting requirements. At a March 23, 2016, hearing of a House Armed Services subcommittee, Government Accountability Office (GAO) Director of Acquisition and Sourcing Management Michael Sullivan argued that the Block 4 estimated cost justifies its management as a separate program, but F-35 Program Executive Officer (PEO) Air Force Lt. Gen. Christopher Bogdan countered that breaking it off would create an administrative burden and add to the program’s price tag and schedule.157 The House-passed version of the FY2020 National Defense Authorization Act (H.R. 2500) contained a provision (§132) that would require the Secretary of Defense to designate the C2D2 program as a major subprogram of the F-35 program. An enacted into law, the act (P.L. 116-92) does not designate Block 4 and/or C2D2 as a major subprogram, but requires the Secretary of 153 Thomas P. Ehrhard, An Air Force Strategy for the Long Haul, Washington, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, 2009, pp. xii and xiv. The report was released on September 17, 2009, according to CSBA’s website, and is available at http://www.csbaonline.org/4Publications/PubLibrary/R.20090917.An_Air_Force_Strat/R.20090917.An_Air_Force_Strat.pdf. Subsequent to writing this report, the author became a special assistant to the Air Force Chief of Staff. 154 Pat Host, “Pentagon faces major cost increase on F-35 Block 4 modernisation,” IHS Jane’s Defence Weekly, March 8, 2018, http://janes.ihs.com/Janes/Display/1830607. 155 Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, FY 2017 Annual Report, Washington, DC, January 2018, p. 31, http://www.dote.osd.mil/pub/reports/FY2017/. 156 Lara Seligman, “What F-35 Can Learn From F-22 Upgrade Hiccups,” Aviation Week and Space Technology, March 28, 2018, http://aviationweek.com/defense/what-f-35-can-learn-f-22-upgrade-hiccups. 157 Valerie Insinna, “Bogdan: Separate Program For F-35 Block 4 Mods Would Increase Cost, Schedule Difficulties,” Defense Daily, March 24, 2016. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 35 Defense to submit an annual integrated master schedule and past performance assessment for each planned phase of Block 4 and C2D2 upgrades. Competition Lieutenant General Bogdan’s comments regarding the difficulty of cost control in a sole-source environment (see “Engine Costs,” above) reflect a broader issue affecting defense programs as industry consolidates and fewer sources of supply are available for advanced systems. Congress may wish to consider the merits of maintaining competition when overseeing system procurements (for example, the use of competition to maintain cost pressure was a principal argument in favor of the F-35 alternate engine program).158 On the F-35 program, that competition could include contracting for lifecycle support as a way to address sustainment costs. Appropriate Fighter Mix A significant issue, beginning with the FY2020 DOD budget submission, is the optimal mix of fighter aircraft in the Air Force fleet. Previous plans had focused on the F-35 as the mainstay of the future fighter fleet, in keeping with an Air Force initiative to move to an all-fifth-generation-and-beyond force. In FY2020, however, the Air Force requested an initial 8 of a projected buy of 144 F-15EX fighters. The F-15EX is an improved version of the F-15 Eagle and Strike Eagle fighter series, which the U.S. last acquired in 2001.159 Subsequently, the Air Force justified the request on two grounds: that the operating costs of the F-35 were significantly higher than fourth-generation aircraft like the F-15EX, and that the service needed to acquire 72 new fighters per year to maintain its fleets as older aircraft retire.160 The Air Force has maintained that F-35 and F-15EX do not compete directly for funding. Observers note that, regardless, the F-15EX proposal came at a time when the Air Force reduced its planned F-35 buy from 60 to 48 jets per year. Further, some argue that the additional capabilities inherent in the F-35 provide a better value at similar cost.161 F-15 advocates note the age of current U.S. F-15s, and that new F-15EXs offer better value than extending the lives of existing ones.162 More recently, the Air Force has been considering replacing some F-16s, which had been expected to be replaced by F-35s, with unmanned systems instead. [Air Combat Command commander Gen. Mike] Holmes suggested that low-cost and attritable unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) might be considered… as a replacement for F- 158 For more on this issue, see CRS Report R41131, F-35 Alternate Engine Program: Background and Issues for Congress. 159 For more on this issue, see CRS Insight IN11078, Proposed Air Force Acquisition of New F-15EXs. 160 Valerie Insinna, “The US Air Force doesn’t want F-15X. But it needs more fighter jets,” Defense News, February 28, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/digital-show-dailies/air-warfare-symposium/2019/02/28/the-air-force-doesnt-want-f-15x-but-it-needs-more-fighter-jets/. Oriana Pawlyk, “Air Force Wants Both F-35 and F-15EX. But if Forced to Choose, It’s No Contest: SecAF,” Military.com, May 20, 2019, https://www.military.com/daily-news/2019/05/20/air-force-wants-both-f-35-and-f-15ex-if-forced-choose-its-no-contest-secaf.html. 161 See, for example, John Venable, The F-35A Is the World’s Most Dominant, Cost-Effective Fighter: The Air Force Needs to Accelerate Its Acquisition Now, The Heritage Foundation, Washington, DC, March 2, 2020, https://www.heritage.org/defense/report/the-f-35a-the-worlds-most-dominant-cost-effective-fighter-the-air-force-needs-0. 162 Brian Everstine, “NORTHCOM Stresses Importance of F-15EX Buy for Homeland Defense,” Air Force Magazine, March 12, 2020, https://www.airforcemag.com/northcom-stresses-importance-of-f-15ex-buy-for-homeland-defense/. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 36 16 Block 25/30 jets… within 5-8 years. In congressional testimony on March 12, Holmes added that ACC’s goal is to achieve a fighter fleet ratio of 60% fifth-generation jets, such as F-35As and F-22s, to 40% fourth-generation aircraft, including F-15s, F-16s and A-10s. 163 That ratio had previously been expressed as 50-50.164 Engine Cost Transparency In the specific case of the F-35, Pratt & Whitney and the Joint Program Office have declined to reveal the cost per engine in each LRIP contract, replacing dollar costs with percentage savings and aggregate contract values that include items other than the engines themselves. Congress may wish to consider whether this approach is sufficient to provide useful oversight, and weigh that value against a contractor’s right to protect competition-sensitive data. A possible analogue can be found in the debate over whether public disclosure of the contract value for the B-21 bomber might reveal more data than prudent, or whether that is a reasonable cost to allow proper program oversight. Affordability An additional potential issue for Congress for the F-35 program concerns the affordability of the F-35, particularly in the context of projected shortfalls in both Air Force fighters and Navy and Marine Corps strike fighters. Although the F-35 was conceived as a relatively affordable strike fighter, some observers are concerned that in a situation of constrained DOD resources, F-35s might not be affordable in the annual quantities planned by DOD, at least not without reducing funding for other DOD programs. As the annual production rate of the F-35 increases, the program will require more than $10 billion per year in acquisition funding at the same time that DOD will face other budgetary challenges. The issue of F-35 affordability is part of a larger and long-standing issue concerning the overall affordability of DOD’s tactical aircraft modernization effort, which also includes procurement of F/A-18E/Fs, increasingly capable unmanned aerial vehicles, and, as mentioned, F-15EXs.165 Implications for Industrial Base Another potential issue for Congress regarding the F-35 program concerns its potential impact on the U.S. tactical aircraft industrial base. The award of the F-35 SDD contract to a single company (Lockheed Martin) raised concerns in Congress and elsewhere that excluding Boeing from this program would reduce that company’s ability to continue designing and manufacturing fighter aircraft.166 163 Steve Trimble, “As USAF Fleet Plans Evolve, Can the F-35A Program Survive Intact?,” Aviation Week, March 19, 2020, https://aviationweek.com/defense-space/usaf-fleet-plans-evolve-can-f-35a-program-survive-intact. 164 Valerie Insinna, “The US Air Force doesn’t want F-15X. But it needs more fighter jets,” Defense News, February 28, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/digital-show-dailies/air-warfare-symposium/2019/02/28/the-air-force-doesnt-want-f-15x-but-it-needs-more-fighter-jets/. 165 For more on this issue, see CRS Report RL33543, Tactical Aircraft Modernization: Issues for Congress. 166 For more information, see CRS Report RL31360, Joint Strike Fighter (JSF): Potential National Security Questions Pertaining to a Single Production Line, by Christopher Bolkcom and Daniel H. Else (out of print; available to congressional clients from the author upon request). F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 37 Similar concerns regarding engine-making firms have been raised since 2006, when DOD first proposed (as part of the FY2007 budget submission) terminating the F136 alternate engine program. Some observers are concerned that if the F136 were cancelled, General Electric would not have enough business designing and manufacturing fighter jet engines to continue competing in the future with Pratt & Whitney (the manufacturer of the F135 engine). Others argued that General Electric’s considerable business in both commercial and military engines was sufficient to sustain General Electric’s ability to produce this class of engine in the future. Exports of the F-35 could also have a strong impact on the U.S. tactical aircraft industrial base through export. Most observers believe that the F-35 could potentially dominate the combat aircraft export market, much as the F-16 has. Like the F-16, the F-35 appears to be attractive because of its relatively low cost, flexible design, and promise of high performance. Competing fighters and strike fighters, including France’s Rafale, Sweden’s JAS Gripen, and the Eurofighter Typhoon, are positioned to challenge the F-35 in the fighter export market. Some observers are concerned that by allowing foreign companies to participate in the F-35 program, DOD may be inadvertently opening up U.S. markets to foreign competitors who enjoy direct government subsidies. A May 2004 GAO report found that the F-35 program could “significantly impact” the U.S. and global industrial base.167 GAO found that two laws designed to protect segments of the U.S. defense industry—the Buy American Act and the Preference for Domestic Specialty Metals clause—would have no impact on decisions regarding which foreign companies would participate in the F-35 program, because DOD has decided that foreign companies that participate in the F-35 program, and which have signed reciprocal procurement agreements with DOD to promote defense cooperation, are eligible for a waiver. Future Joint Fighter Programs Congress consolidated the JAST and ASTOVL programs after finding “no apparent willingness or commitment by the Department to examine future needs from a joint, affordable, and integrated warfighting perspective.”168 DOD states that the F-35 program “was structured from the beginning to be a model of acquisition reform, with an emphasis on jointness, technology maturation and concept demonstrations, and early cost and performance trades integral to the weapon system requirements definition process.”169 A subsequent RAND Corporation study found that the fundamental concept behind the F-35 program—that of making one basic airframe serve multiple services’ requirements—may have been flawed.170 Congress may wish to consider how the advantages and/or disadvantages of joint programs may have changed as a consequence of evolutions in warfighting technology, doctrine, and tactics. 167 General Accounting Office, Joint Strike Fighter Acquisition: Observations on the Supplier Base, GAO-04-554, May 2004. 168 U.S. Congress, House Committee on National Security, National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1996, report to accompany H.R. 1530, 104th Cong., 1st sess., June 1, 1995, H.Rept. 104-131. 169 Department of Defense. Selected Acquisition Report (SAR)[for] F-35 (JSF), December 31, 2007, p. 4. 170 Mark A. Lorell, Michael Kennedy, Robert S. Leonard, Ken Munson, Shmuel Abramzon, David L. An, Robert A. Guffey, Do Joint Fighter Programs Save Money?, RAND Project Air Force, Santa Monica, CA, 2013, http://www.rand.org/pubs/monographs/MG1225.html. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service 38 Appendix. F-35 Key Performance Parameters Table A-1 summarizes key performance parameters for the three versions of the F-35. Table A-1. F-35 Key Performance Parameters (KPPs) Source of KPP KPP F-35A Air Force CTOL version F-35B Marine Corps STOVL version F-35C Navy carrier-suitable version Joint Radio frequency signature Very low observable Very low observable Very low observable Combat radius 590 nm Air Force mission profile 450 nm Marine Corps mission profile 600 nm Navy mission profile Sortie generation 3 surge / 2 sustained 4 surge / 3 sustained 3 surge / 2 sustained Logistics footprint < 8 C-17 equivalent loads (24 PAA) < 8 C-17 equivalent loads (20 PAA) < 46,000 cubic feet, 243 short tons Mission reliability 93% 95% 95% Interoperability Meet 100% of critical, top-level information exchange requirements; secure voice and data Marine Corps STOVL mission performance – short-takeoff distance n/a 550 feet n/a STOVL mission performance – vertical lift bring-back n/a 2 x 1K JDAM, 2 x AIM-120, with reserve fuel n/a Navy Maximum approach speed n/a n/a 145 knots Source: F-35 program office, October 11, 2007. Notes: PAA is primary authorized aircraft (per squadron); vertical lift bring back is the amount of weapons with which plane can safely land. Author Information Jeremiah Gertler Specialist in Military Aviation F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program Congressional Research Service RL30563 · VERSION 72 · UPDATED 39 Disclaimer This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 		2020-05-07T09:34:08-0400
